A long-term observational study has shown that drinking one or more artificially sweetened beverages on a daily basis is linked to almost three times the risk of developing stroke or dementia compared to those who drank them less than once a week. However, claims that the observational study includes a number of limitations have come to light, with the ISA stating the study “provides no convincing evidence and no plausible mechanism for a causal relationship between diet drinks’ consumption and health indices, in this case stroke and dementia.”The research was based on data from the Framingham Heart Study Offspring Cohort and looked at 2,888 primarily Caucasian people over the age of 45 for the stroke study and 1,484 people over the age of 60 for the dementia part of the study.Researchers reviewed what people were drinking at different times over a period of seven years, based on food frequency questionnaires filled in by the study subjects. They then tracked the study subjects for ten years to establish who developed stroke or dementia, and compared the data on eating and drinking habits to the risk of developing stroke and dementia over the course of the study.Among the study participants tracked during the study, there were 97 cases (3 percent) of stroke, 82 of which were ischemic (caused by blockage of blood vessels), and 81 (5 percent) cases of dementia, 63 of which were diagnosed as Alzheimer’s disease.Used statistical models adjusted for various risk factors, researchers found that people who drank at least one artificially-sweetened beverage a day were three times as likely to develop ischemic stroke and 2.9 times as likely to develop Alzheimer's disease dementia. The data collected did not distinguish between the types of artificial sweeteners used in the beverages.However, a release from the ISA has stated that the research is “yet another observational study providing no convincing evidence and no plausible mechanism for a causal relationship between diet drinks’ consumption and health indices, in this case stroke and dementia.”“The findings of that study, in fact, are based only on a small group of 97 cases of incident stroke and 81 cases of dementia out of a total of 2888 participants aged over 45 and 1484 participants over 60 who were included in the analysis for incident stroke and dementia, respectively.”“Given such small numbers, consumption of low-calorie sweetened beverages could be divided into 3 levels only, i.e. non users, occasional (less than daily) and regular users (one or more beverage per day).”“The latter category included 519 subjects only. This translates into less than two-dozen cases of stroke or dementia among regular low-calorie sweetened beverage users. In addition, there was no convincing trend in risk, i.e. the hazard ratio of ischemic stroke was already about 2-fold elevated among occasional low-calorie sweetened beverage users.”Professor Carlo La Vecchia from the University of Milan, Italy, also noted the limitations of the study, saying, “The association between diet drinks and stroke is less strong in the third statistical model, which adjusted for additional cardiometabolic variables that may be associated with an increased risk of stroke.”“Thus, under-adjustment is possible, i.e. more accurate and/or valid measurement of blood pressure and other covariates may lead to less strong association. With regard to dementia, in the more complete model 3, there is no significant association with diet drinks’ consumption.”The study’s authors noted that the main limitation of the research was that it only shows a trend among one group of people and was not designed, or able, to prove cause and effect.Rachel K. Johnson, PhD, MPH, RD, past chair of the American Heart Association’s Nutrition Committee and professor of nutrition at the University of Vermont said that limiting added sugars is an important strategy to support good nutrition and healthy body weights, but warned that until more is known, people should use artificially sweetened drinks cautiously.“They may have a role for people with diabetes and in weight loss, but we encourage people to drink water, low-fat milk or other beverages without added sweeteners,” she said.Within its statement, the ISA added that there is an established and strong bank of scientific evidence from clinical studies demonstrating that low calorie sweeteners and diet drinks containing them can be a useful tool in sugar and energy reduction, when used in place of sugar.“At a time when obesity (a major risk factor for cardiovascular diseases including stroke) and diabetes rates (a known risk factor for dementia) continue to increase worldwide, it would be unfortunate and dangerous from a public health perspective if people were to be discouraged from using low calorie sweeteners as a safe and effective means of reducing and maintaining their weight, as well as of managing blood glucose levels,” they stated.
Hot off the heels of completing its acquisition of WhiteWave, Danone has posted its sales for the first quarter which show a slowdown in Europe and Brazil. The French multinational says it has been a “slow start to the year”, although this was in line with expectations.Consolidated sales stood at €5.464 million (US$5.85 million), up 0.7% like-for-like, reflecting a -2.6% decline in volume and a +3.3% rise in value. Reported sales were up 3.0%, including changes in exchange rates (+2.8%) and in the scope of consolidation (-0.5%).The exchange-rate effect reflects the positive impact of changes in the Russian ruble, Brazilian real and the US dollar. Changes in the scope of consolidation result primarily from the deconsolidation of Dumex China since May 31, 2016.Danone, the largest yogurt maker in the world with brands like Actimel and Activia, was impacted by the Fresh Dairy Products division which reported sales that were down 2.3% like-for-like, including a 5.3% decline in volume and a 3.0% rise in value.In Europe, sales continued to be impacted by difficult market conditions and Activia’s performance. Danone stressed that is is implementing “all necessary initiatives to reverse this trend.”Local execution plans are being reworked (packaging, communication campaigns and activation) and will be rolled out gradually, country by country in the course of the second quarter. They will be complemented by new product launches in Activia’s range. In parallel, local brands such as Les deux vaches in France, Danio in Poland and in Italy as well as Oikos in Italy have continued to be successfully developed.Meanwhile, Danone generated stable growth within the CIS and North America region, while in the US, slower category growth and price pressure from competitors weighed on first-quarter sales.Backed by strong brands, market leadership and reinforced communication and innovation plans, Danone will continue to pursue its growth agenda as planned in 2017.In Russia, Danone once again demonstrated its resilience, in a consumption context which remains difficult. The enhancement of its brand portfolio’s value through rising prices and very positive mix management continued to offset a decline in volumes in lower-end segments.Early Life NutritionEarly Life Nutrition sales rose 4.1% like-for-like, including a 0.1% rise in volume and a 4.0% increase in value.According to the company, this reflected major gains in developing a direct distribution model in China, where “direct” sales rose by a very strong double-digit growth supported by its growing presence in specialized stores and direct e-commerce through successful initiatives, such as the recent launch of Aptamil Platinium on the ultrapremium segment.In parallel, the transition of the “indirect” channel for China, induced by a fast-changing regulatory environment, continued and should last until the new regulations are fully enforced, creating volatility in the performance from one quarter to the other.Danone also said it is pursuing its investments in Tailored Nutrition, a major growth driver in the short and medium term. This segment, which already represents around 10% of division revenue, rose strongly in the first quarter.“Q1 has been an important time for all teams at Danone. As anticipated, sales are showing a slow start to the year. In a continued volatile environment, we have made progress on our key priorities across our categories,” says CEO Emmanuel Faber.“In particular, to address headwinds and sub-optimal execution in the Fresh Dairy category in Europe, which sequentially impacted our performance, we continue to adapt our plans. In addition, in a matter of only a few weeks, we simplified our global organization, and localized further our decision-making. This new organization allowed us to decouple the company’s growth & efficiency agenda, with the Protein program launched to support both our short term results and our growth journey.”“At the same time we are entering into a new chapter with the acquisition of WhiteWave. With leading positions in some of the fastest-growing, health-focused global categories, this combination will drive our Alimentation Revolution, our business performance, and will accelerate our 2020 profitable growth journey.”“I am particularly impressed with the performance of Alpro in Europe, which paves the way to a successful rollout across many more countries in the future. In the US, last week's closing ended a prolonged process which caused growing managerial and business disruptions in a low growth context for the food sector. The combined experience and capabilities of the DanoneWave management team and the extensive work done by the integration team since July will fully deliver our synergy plan from day 1, address the current business challenges, and capture the business opportunities ahead starting from H2.”
Nutriati, a food technology company focused on the research, development and commercialization of innovative plant-based food ingredients, announced that it has closed on an US $8.0 million investment round. The investment round was led by London-basedTate & LyleVentures, which invests in expansion-stage companies in food sciences and enabling technologies in line withTate & LylePLC’s strategy to grow in specialty food ingredients, and Powerplant Ventures, a Los Angeles-based venture firm that invests in visionary companies that leverage the power of plants to deliver better nutrition in more sustainable and ethical ways.The round also included participation from NRV (Richmond, Virginia), and Blueberry Ventures (San Francisco, California). Nutriati will use the funds to commercialize the Company’s innovative plant-based ingredients. Nutriati’s processing capabilities allow it to leverage new plant-based sources and create ingredients that offer premium in-product functional characteristics that meet the growing global demand for high-quality, plant-based protein and gluten free flour ingredients.Nutriati’s ingredient platform features superior organoleptic characteristics to current ingredient offerings, thus enabling food manufacturers to create plant-based food options with taste, texture and nutritional profiles that were previously unattainable. Nutriati’s solutions are ideal for numerous applications including gluten free baked goods, pasta, protein bars and drinks. Nutriati has partnered with PLT Health Solutions, Inc., to bring its first two flagship products, a protein concentrate derived from chickpeas and a high protein, gluten-free chickpea flour, to market.“Today’s consumers are focused on healthier eating and ‘real foods’. The plant-based protein market has been expanding rapidly in recent years, and demand for non-soy, non-dairy, and gluten-free proteins has been particularly strong. We are pleased to work with Nutriati to introduce the next generation of novel plant ingredient,” said Tate & Lyle Ventures Managing Partner, David Atkinson.Click to Enlarge“The interesting thing with Nutriati for us is that this investment round will literally take it to market,” Atkinson (pictured) toldFoodIngredientsFirst. “We have PLT lined up in the States for sales & marketing for these products and they have already been sampling the product in the market and getting very good customer response. Powerplant, another one of the investors have quite a broad portfolio of companies. Part of their due diligence was to trial the products and they were very positive on them.”“This is a business that is a startup, but has been around for a little while. We are coming in and leading this investment round, with a view to actually get it to market, which hopefully gives them a little lead in terms of innovation and getting a chickpea product to market,” he added.He would not confirm a specific timeline is scaling up to be done, but said that it is likely that products will hit the market within the next 9-12 months.The specific investment amount from Tate & Lyle was not disclosed, however he confirmed that their natural investment range are always in the region of £1-2 million, with more reserved for follow-up financing and this one is no different.Atkinson stresses: “Tate & Lyle Ventures is not part of Tate & Lyle. We manage the fund on their behalf and stay at arms’ length. We were set up in 2006 with a first fund of £25 million, with a second in 2013 of £30 million. Our investment scope is to invest in the areas of food science and technology. The reason we keep an arms’ length distance is that it allows us to invest in areas that are not central to the overall Tate & Lyle business at the moment. We can reach out into areas that we believe we are very interesting in the future with a 5-7 year plus timeline.”Production at Nutriati will be done by co-manufacturers. “So they have a network who get involved in the processing and over the last few months that’s what they have been developing and getting agreements in place. The co-manufacturing process supports the investment and business plan,” he noted.“Nutriati’s products are squarely in line with needs of product developers innovating in the plant-based food space. We are excited to work with the talented Nutriati team to enable food manufacturers to increase the range, quality, nutrition and sustainability of their offerings to consumers,” said Powerplant Ventures Managing Director, T.K. Pillan.“Nutriati is extremely excited and fortunate to have these four investors join our mission to improve the food supply with healthier, better tasting, options to consumers. Their global expertise and strategic support will fuel our next stage of growth of bringing nutritional, plant based differentiating ingredients to the world.” said Nutriati Chief Executive Officer and Co-Founder, Richard Kelly.“We have recognized a fundamental shift taking place in the food and beverage community, driven by consumer purchasing habits toward better tasting and healthier plant-based foods. The Nutriati team is excited to be an important part of this community, working to positively impact social and environmental food issues while building a profitable and sustainable business focused on plant-based foods,” said Nutrati Chief Technology Officer and Co-Founder, Michael Spinelli.R&D development around chickpea as a protein alternative ingredient is intensifying. Earlier this month,FoodIngredientsFirstpublished avideo interviewwith Ram Reifen of the University of Jerusalem and founder of the start-up company Chick P, who discussed their product launch.“We have been working on chickpea for many years and began by improving and enhancing the nutritional quality. Over the last two years we have been able to come up with a product with a very high protein content: 70-90%. So it could be either a concentrate or an isolate. Chickpea protein is as good as soy protein, but there are no phytoestrogens and it is non allergenic.” The full interview can be seenhere.“Disruptive Green” was tipped as Innova Market Insights’ number 2 trend for 2017. The market researcher notes: “As plant milks, meat alternatives and vegan offerings have moved rapidly moved into the mainstream, consumers are looking for innovative options to take the inherent benefits of plants into their daily lives. Even dairy companies are now leveraging the functional and technical benefits of plants in new product development. This is driving more variety and excitement into their category. Plants are finding applications in diverse categories, whether as a product base as flavor inclusions, or as a source of color or health.”The report notes: “The strong rise in demand for vegetarian and vegan options is having a profound impact on new product development, particularly in western markets. According to Innova Market Insights new product data, over the last 5 years, US product launches tracked with vegetarian/vegan claims have grown faster (+32-38% CAGR) than overall US food and beverage launches tracked (6.7% CAGR). Launches tracked with vegetarian or vegan claims grew from 6% to 17% of total US launches over this period.”Other investments from Tate & Lyle Ventures include ProLupin, where it was part of an initial investment in early 2016. Based in Grimmen, Germany is a spin-off of the Fraunhofer Institute for Process Engineering and Packaging. The company focuses on the development, manufacture and marketing of plant origin, lactose-free milk substitutes based on protein from blue sweet lupin. Prolupin is developing its own range of products which are pure organic, non-GM and free from lactose, cholesterol and gluten (except pasta) under its MADE WITH LUVE brand. This strategy aims to help increase consumer interest in lupin protein and to support sales and development of its range of lupin ingredients.So why focus on alternative proteins? “We have tended to focus on one or two key themes that seem to be emerging within the food and ingredients space. This includes the microbiome and pre and probiotics. So one of the companies that we have invested in is Evolve Biosystems, which is looking at the infant microbiome. ProLupin and Nutriati are focused on another area that is key theme for the industry right now which is protein and that is a great investment theme because the fund is focused on financial return, as well as being a window on the world for Tate & Lyle as a group,” he explains.By Robin Wyers
A day after posting solid Q1 results, Unilever has announced it has signed an agreement to acquire Sir Kensington’s, a New York-based condiment maker, although the terms of the deal have not yet been disclosed.Considered a pioneer and leader in condiments for organic and natural markets, Sir Kensington’s has shown strong growth since starting out in 2010 and has a range of award-winning products including mustard, ketchup, mayonnaise and a ground-breaking vegan mayo, Fabanaise, which is made from aquafaba.The ethos behind the company has been to use the finest, sustainably sourced ingredients and, according to Unilever, its mission and products align with Unilever’s vision to make sustainable living commonplace and the acquisition will complement the company’s current portfolio of products in its Foods category.“We are excited to bring Sir Kensington’s into the Unilever family. Their mission to bring ‘integrity and charm to ordinary and overlooked food’ is very much in line with our Unilever Sustainable Living Plan,” said Kees Kruythoff, President, Unilever North America.“Sir Kensington’s is an innovative business with outstanding products and a leader in the organic and natural marketplace. We look forward to leveraging our joint understanding of food trends and consumer preferences to significantly grow the business.”Matthew McCarthy, Vice President of Foods, Unilever North America, added: “Sir Kensington's is a beautiful brand. The acquisition aligns perfectly with our global Sustainable Nutrition strategy, moving us forward on our mission to delight consumers, produce delicious food with less impact on the environment and promote nutritious cooking.”Co-Founders Mark Ramadan and Scott Norton will continue in their roles at Sir Kensington’s.“We’re honored to partner with such a progressive and purpose-driven company in this next chapter,” said Mark Ramadan, CEO & Co-Founder, Sir Kensington’s.Scott Norton, Co-Founder, Sir Kensington’s, added: “Working with Unilever will allow us to more rapidly expand distribution while holding true to our values as we help define the next generation of good food.”The deal is expected to close in the next few weeks.
Swedish-Danish company and producer of vegetable oils and fats AAK has reported an all-time high operating profit for the first quarter 2017 which reached SEK 431 million (US$48 million), up 13% on last year. The company says how total volumes continued to grow and were 10% up, while organic volume growth was 5%, against a backdrop of strong demand for speciality and semi-speciality products which also generated a volume growth of 6%.Food Ingredients improved 9%, reaching SEK 249 million (US$277 million).“We are happy and proud to see that our determined, targeted and hard work based upon our clear strategy is yielding good results. Again, a record-high operating profit was achieved with a double-digit year-on-year improvement for the Group, a trend since 2010. This is despite parts of the world markets experiencing material challenges,” says AAK CEO Arne Frank."Based on AAK's customer value propositions for health and reduced costs, and our customer product co-development and solutions approach, we continue to remain prudently optimistic about the future. The main drivers are the continued positive underlying development in Food Ingredients and the continued improvement in Chocolate & Confectionery Fats.”In Dairy, the segment continued the strong trend from 2016 and reported high double-digit organic volume growth, where North Latin America, Asia, and the US showed particularly strong growth.After some challenges, the Bakery segment was back to organic growth in several important regions, however the European market remained a challenge, while Special Nutrition reported medium single-digit volume growth, but with a significantly better product mix compared to the corresponding quarter last year. This was driven by a continued volume growth for our Infant Nutrition product range Akonino, building on exceptionally strong volume growth last year.Our other Infant Nutrition product range InFat®, sold through Advanced Lipids AB, a joint venture of AAK and Enzymotec, had a strong volume growth in the quarter.The Foodservice segment reported declining volumes in the quarter. This was mainly due to more challenging market conditions in Europe.Chocolate & Confectionery Fats reported a result of SEK 196 million (US$218 million), an improvement of 23%. Both total volume growth and organic volume growth was 17% in the quarter. There was continued strong organic volume growth for both speciality and semi-speciality products, with several showing exceptional volume growth – in mature as well as in emerging markets.
Golden Peanut and Tree Nuts, a subsidiary of Archer Daniels Midland Company (ADM) has announced that it is investing in a significant upgrade to its peanut processing facility in Alejandro Roca, Cordoba, Argentina. The upgrade plans include the addition of an in-house blancher and the construction of a cold storage warehouse.“We’re continuing to upgrade our capabilities to serve customers in Argentina and Europe,” said Carlos Urquiza, president and general manager of Golden Peanut and Tree Nuts’ operations in Argentina. “An in-house blancher and onsite cold storage will enhance both peanut quality and peanut life at our Alejandro Roca facility. Combined with the new storage facility that we announced in January, the result will be substantially enhanced capabilities for Golden Peanut and Tree Nuts in Argentina – from more efficient unloading to the very highest quality products for our customers, both locally and in the EU markets that we serve from Argentina.”The project will break ground in June 2017, and is expected to be complete in April 2018.Golden Peanut and Tree Nuts, one of the world’s premier handlers and processors of peanuts and tree nuts, has announced or completed a wide range of significant expansion and improvement projects across its global network in the last year, both in the United States and in its international operations.“We are committed to remaining the provider of choice for peanut and tree nut customers around the globe,” said Greg Mills, president, Golden Peanut and Tree Nuts. “Our customers expect the very best from Golden Peanut and Tree Nuts, and we are investing in our business to ensure we live up to those expectations.”
Amid changing consumer tastes, Swiss food giant Nestlé has achieved its modest 2-4% growth target for three-month sales for 2017 as weak consumer demand impacts packaged foods in North America and weak prices in Western European markets affect growth. Nestlé says sales increased by 0.4% on a reported basis to CHF 21.0 billion (US$21 billion), while organic growth was solid at 2.3%, with 1.3% of real internal growth (RIG) and pricing of 1.0%.Sales were reduced by foreign exchange (-0.4%) and net divestments (-1.5%), and organic growth was 0.8% for developed markets and 4.3% for emerging markets.Despite the modest growth Nestlé CEO, Mark Schneider, remains upbeat."Organic growth of 2.3% this quarter is within our full-year guidance range. The leap year comparison and other seasonal effects made the start of this year particularly challenging,” he says.“We were encouraged by the growth in Asia and the resilience of consumer spending in Europe. Consumer demand in the Americas remained soft. Our pricing improved moderately. We confirm our 2017 guidance and have made good progress with our growth and efficiency projects to position our company for enhanced value creation."North America faced an environment of soft consumer demand, says the company, and in the US coffee creamers and frozen food maintained good momentum but confectionery and pet care declined.Brazil had a difficult quarter with subdued Easter trading and fragile economic conditions resulting in negative RIG and organic growth, Mexico's growth remained positive but decelerated, reflecting difficult comparables and weaker consumer confidence. Petcare saw good growth across Latin America.Reported sales in zone EMENA declined by 6.9% to CHF 4.0 billion (US$4 billion). Organic growth was solid at 1.7%, based on resilient RIG of 1.7% and flat pricing. Net divestments reduced reported sales by 5.9%, mainly due to the transfer of ice cream to the Froneri joint venture. Foreign exchange headwinds reduced reported sales by a further 2.7%.Pricing improved, mainly from increases taken in Nescafé throughout the zone. Pricing actions had a moderate impact on RIG. Petcare saw strong growth across the zone, particularly in Russia. Turkey and North Africa performed well, while the Middle East declined as political instability and deflation persisted.Reported sales in Nestlé Nutrition increased by 0.2% to CHF 2.6 billion (US$2.6 billion). Organic growth was 1.1%, comprised of -0.4% RIG and 1.5% pricing. Net divestments and foreign exchange reduced reported sales by 0.4% and 0.5% respectively.Price increases had a mild adverse effect on RIG in the short-term. Growth in China improved moderately, helped by increased demand for first stage products and strong momentum of illuma in the super premium segment. Our NAN Optipro roll-out continued to deliver good growth across Asia.Meanwhile, the company also said how Nespresso's growth was solid as it continued to gain traction in North America. Nestlé Health Science maintained mid single-digit growth, reflecting good growth in Medical Nutrition. Nestlé Skin Health saw strong growth benefiting from low prior year comparables and several new product launches.In terms of the outlook for 2017, Nestlé expects organic growth between 2% and 4%. In order to drive future profitability, and it plans to increase restructuring costs considerably in 2017. As a result, the trading operating profit margin in constant currency is expected to be stable.Underlying earnings per share in constant currency and capital efficiency are expected to increase.Last monthFoodIngredientsFirstreported how Nestlé UK and Ireland is stepping up to the sugar challenge by stripping out 10% of sugar from its confectionery portfolio by 2018. The move will see around 7,500 tons of sugar removed across a number of well-known brands through a range of methods and initiatives.While a major breakthrough by Nestle scientists has led to bold claims of “making less sugar taste just as good” - with the potential to reduce sugar by up to 40 percent in the confectioners’ products. Nestle is patenting its findings and will begin to use the faster-dissolving sugar across a range of its confectionery products from 2018 onwards.By Gaynor Selby
Associated British Foods (ABF) has published its interim first-half results which sees pre-tax profits at the food and fashion group jump to £624 million (US$800 million) by 35% in the 24 weeks to March 4. And revenues at the British multinational food processing and retailing company went up by 19% to £7.3 billion (US$9.3 billion).The group achieved “a more acceptable rate of return in sugar”, while further progress was made by the ingredients and grocery businesses.Chairman Charles Sinclair said how pleased he is with the “excellent progress across the whole group”, as revenue of £7.3bn in the first half was 19% ahead of last year and adjusted operating profit of £652 million (US$835 million) was 36% ahead.“The underlying growth of the group was therefore strong with revenue up 7% and adjusted operating profit up 23% at constant currency. Net financing costs remained at a similar level to last year primarily due to the effect of translation of interest on our foreign currency denominated debt. As previously indicated, last year’s tax rate benefited from the revaluation of deferred tax to reflect announced reductions in the UK corporation tax rate and, as a result, this year’s underlying rate has increased from 21.3% to 22.7%,” he says.He also says how adjusted earnings per share were 30% ahead at 59.7 pence and during this period the company completed the disposal of two businesses; US herbs and spices and its south China cane sugar operations.“These disposals generated a profit of £255 million (US$327 million), with an associated tax charge of £82m (US$105 million), both of which are included in the group’s statutory performance measures. As a result, profit before tax was 92% higher than last year and earnings per share were 79% ahead.”He also pointed out how 2016 represented a “turning point” for the sugar business which was the single largest driver of the group’s underlying profit improvement in the first half.“Higher sugar prices and further significant savings generated by performance improvement both contributed to this and to a more acceptable return on investment. Illovo is the leading producer of sugar in Africa and our move to full ownership last year has enabled us to focus on accelerating its performance improvement and commercial development in markets with high growth in both population and income per capita.”“I would also highlight the major contribution made to the group’s profit growth by the substantial increases from Grocery and Ingredients.”Speaking about Brexit, Sinclair added that the UK’s decision to leave the EU has prompted a team at the group working for several months to determine the impact that it will have on the group’s businesses.“Our businesses are now working to seize the opportunities and mitigate any risks. We are actively engaging with a number of Government departments to ensure that these opportunities and risks are recognized,” he adds.The Board has also declared an interim dividend of 11.35 pence per share, an increase of 10% on last year. The dividend will be paid on 7 July 2017 to shareholders registered at the close of business on 9 June 2017.Revenue momentum is expected to continue across all of ABF businesses in the second half, but profit growth, at current exchange rates, will be be tempered primarily by a smaller translation benefit and the full effect of the devaluation of sterling against the US dollar.“Our outlook for the group’s full year results has improved and we now expect to report good growth in adjusted operating profit and adjusted earnings per share.”
Consumers are increasingly interested in how their food is produced and look for claims such as no growth hormones, no GMOs, no antibiotics, etc. on their food products. Many studies have focused on consumers’ willingness to pay for individual food attributes, but have not ranked which production attributes consumers say are most important to them.In a U of I study, the “no growth hormones” attribute was prioritized as most important and “organic” as the least important. For products like poultry, the USDA forbids the use of hormones, meaning consumers may not be well informed about production claims.For many consumers, buying a gallon of milk is much more complex than finding the preferred fat content and expiration date. They want to know how the cows were treated, what they were fed, whether they received growth hormones or antibiotics, whether the milk is organic, and so on. A recent University of Illinois study ranks which of these production attributes are most important to buyers for four different products: beef, chicken, milk, and eggs.The study determined the importance of seven specific on-farm practices in consumers’ purchasing decisions:• Animals were not administered growth hormones.• Genetically modified organisms were not used in the production of this product (non-GMO).• Animals were humanely raised.• Animals were not administered antibiotics.• Animals were raised in a free-range (or cage-free) environment.•  Animals were grass-fed (or raised on a vegetarian diet).• The product is certified organic.The top three attributes overall were “no growth hormones”, “non-GMO”, and “humanely raised”, though there were differences in importance based on product type. The “organic” attribute was ranked lowest in importance for consumers.“The biggest surprise in the study is that ‘no growth hormones’ is the number one concern consumers have across the board on all of these products,” says U of I food economist and lead researcher Brenna Ellison. “It’s odd because growth hormones are already prohibited for poultry products. Further, products that are certified organic or humanely-raised also prohibit the use of growth hormones in animals. Ultimately, it means consumers are spending unnecessary time looking for labels that reflect this particular attribute.”The presence of such labeling claims can determine the sales of one product over another identical product. If one producer labels its packages of chicken as having “no growth hormones” and another producer doesn’t, the latter is at a disadvantage when consumers are selecting for that specific attribute. Even though both brands of chicken are hormone-free, by government mandate, the producer who didn’t pay to add a label may suffer.  Products that carry the “no growth hormones” claim must note that these are prohibited by the government on the packaging, but this is usually in the fine print where consumers may or may not be looking.The lack of importance of the “organic” claim was also surprising to Ellison and her co-authors, Kathleen Brooks and Taro Mieno of the University of Nebraska.“When most people hear the term ‘organic,’ they think of produce, fruits, and vegetables. I don’t think the term translates as well to animals. Consequently, consumers may not understand that the organic certification for meat and other animal products actually already includes a lot of these other production attributes.”Ellison says the fact that producers keep putting multiple claims on their products, even though broad claims like “organic” and “humanely raised” encompass almost all of the other production attributes, suggests that producers may be skeptical that consumers know the full definition of these labels. “They keep adding more labels to make sure consumers can find all of the things that they want even though one label might do the job.”Labels also provide a way for consumers to express their opinions by voting with their dollars. They can purchase products labeled with concerns that are important to them.“Choosing to buy milk without traces of hormones or antibiotics may be driven more by concerns for our own health than the health of the animal,” Ellison says. “But treatment of the animal is also important to people. The results of the study show that consumers place a greater importance on the ‘humanely raised’ attribute for milk and eggs – animals that keep producing, versus those that go to slaughter.”The study, “Which livestock production claims matter most to consumers?” appears in Agriculture and Human Values. It was co-authored by Brenna Ellison, Kathleen Brooks, and Taro Mieno.Reference:The study, “Which livestock production claims matter most to consumers?” appears in Agriculture and Human Values. It was co-authored by Brenna Ellison, Kathleen Brooks, and Taro Mieno.
Unilever has posted its Q1 results which show a solid start to 2017 with projections on track for the rest of the year. Turnover increased 6.1% to €13.3 billion (US$14.3 million), including a positive currency impact of 2.4%, while underlying sales grew 2.9% with price up 3.0% and volume down 0.1%.Meanwhile in Emerging markets, the underlying sales growth was 6.1% with price up 5.3% and volume up 0.8%.The Anglo-Dutch consumer goods group said that market conditions remained challenging, however growth in India recovered from the uncertainty experienced due to the removal of the Rs.500 and Rs.1,000 notes in November, while Brazil continued to be adversely impacted by the economic crisis. Meanwhile markets in Europe and North America declined in the first quarter.In terms of its Food division, Unilever said that although it has been building its presence in emerging markets, underlying sales were flat in the quarter as the category was particularly impacted by a late Easter period. Excluding spreads, underlying sales grew by 1.7%.A good performance in savory was led by cooking products in emerging markets, driven by the largest  brand Knorr responding to key needs such as nutrition deficiency and the increasing demand for time-saving meal makers. Dressings continued to gain market share led by Hellmann’s innovations that highlight the naturalness of the ingredients, but sales were virtually flat against a strong comparator.Sales in spreads declined by 5.1% as a result of the market contraction in developed countries which was only partially offset by growth in emerging markets.Growth in ice cream was helped by strong innovations behind Unilever’s premium brands including the new Magnum pints (chocolate and ice cream in a tub), as well as the coconut and raspberry variants. Ben & Jerry’s grew at double-digit rates, helped by strong performances of the ‘Wich sandwich and the new pint range ‘Topped’ that takes ice cream indulgence to a new level. Unilever has also extended its less than 50 calories offering under Solero and launched vegan and gluten-free variants under Cornetto.In leaf tea, growth improved further as Lipton is successfully extending its presence in the faster-growing green and matcha segments, while Brooke Bond and T2 had another quarter of strong growth.Unilever CEO Paul Polman explains how the company has adopted a growth strategy since last fall which is beginning to yield positive results.“The first quarter shows growth once more ahead of our markets. This reflects our continued investment in both innovations and brand support, and reconfirms the strength of our long term sustainable compounding growth model,” says CEO Paul Polman.“The change program ‘Connected for Growth’, which we started implementing in the autumn last year, is clearly bearing fruit and is making Unilever more agile and closer to the local markets, unlocking both further growth and margin.“The actions we are taking keep us on track for another year of underlying sales growth ahead of our markets, in the 3–5% range. We also expect an improvement in underlying operating margin this year of at least 80 basis points and strong cash flow. We are raising the dividend by 12%, reflecting the confidence in our outlook.”
Despite some challenging market conditions in several global markets, the Dutch brewer has posted strong results for the first quarter and predicts a solid outlook for the rest of 2017.While markets in Africa, the Middle East and East Europe have adversely impacted volume, Asia Pacific and European volumes have been solid.Heineken volume grew organically by 2.5% in Q1 with key markets like South Africa, Brazil, the US and Italy all contributing to growth, which more than offset weaker volume in Vietnam due to the earlier Vietnamese New Year.Beer volumes sold in Africa, the Middle East and Eastern Europe went down 0.4% year-on-year, while volumes were 0.7% down in the America, while volumes increase 5.4% in Asia Pacific and the overall volumes of beer sold went up 0.6%."Performance in the first quarter was in line with expectations, delivering volume growth against strong comparatives last year,” says chairman of the Executive Board & CEO, Jean-François van Boxmeer.“Asia Pacific continued to outperform and volume in Europe was solid. In Africa, Middle East & Eastern Europe market conditions remain challenging, adversely impacting volume.”“In Americas, whilst Mexican volume was good this was more than offset by weaker volume in Brazil. Our full year expectations remain unchanged."The company added how in South Africa and Ethiopia, volume was up double digit, while performance in the Ivory Coast has been “promising” since the opening of a new brewery.Reported net profit in the quarter was €293 million (US$313.8 million).Also as part of the financial announcement yesterday (Apr 19), Heineken updated the situation about its recent agreement with Kirin Holdings Company Limited to acquire Brasil Kirin Holding S.A. which was entered into in February.“Heineken Brasil products are currently distributed by the Coca Cola bottlers in Brazil. In light of the size and requirements of the proposed future combined portfolio, Heineken now confirms that it intends to leverage Kirin's existing route to market with the Heineken portfolio in the future. Completion of the acquisition is subject to customary regulatory approval and is expected in the first half of 2017.”
Global processing and packaging firm,Tetra Pakhas announced it will launch a new suite of services for its customers using the latest digital technologies. The service will focus on improving the ability to predict machine errors, accelerating response times, and giving the customer faster, direct access toTetra Pak’s global expertise.Powered by Microsoft technology, the company say the new digital solutions will boost manufacturers’ efficiency, cut costs, ensure food safety, and ultimately drive businesses forward.Dennis Jönsson, President and CEO, Tetra Pak said: “Digital technologies are revolutionizing every industry, and it’s exciting to make the latest innovations work for our customers.”“We are pleased to be the first to launch digitalized services, offering customers reduced costs, enhanced efficiency, and peace-of-mind. This is just the beginning of what promises to be a very exciting journey for us and our customers.”Tetra Pak say that the new service solutions for maintenance, issues monitoring and resolution will center around connecting workforces by utilizing wearable technology. The service allows local Tetra Pak service engineers at customer sites to connect directly with global Tetra Pak specialists wherever they are, providing real-time, expert support to customers.Advanced analytics also come into play, with data from filling lines around the world collected into a central database from where it can be accessed and analyzed by a team of Tetra Pak’s global experts. The company says that the robust database means that advanced analysis can be used to predict issues and optimize machine performance.Tetra pack also state that the new equipment at the customer plant can be connected to the Microsoft Azure cloud system which will be managed in house, enabling machines at different production stages such as processing, filling and distribution to communicate with each other and synchronize. They say that this gives the customer an overview of the plant, and offers performance optimization opportunities for the whole production.Tetra Pak will showcase the technologies at the 2017 Hannover Messe, 24-28 April in collaboration with Microsoft.
For many, convenience is a deciding factor when it comes to dealing with necessities such as daily sustenance, creating interesting opportunities for producers of ready meals. However, the growing body of knowledge on the role of nutrition in overall health is affecting this sector of the food industry, and has prompted many consumers to inspect closely what they are putting in their bodies.FoodIngredientsFirstspoke to a number of industry experts on consumer expectations vis-à-vis ready meals, as well as the key trends driving development in this sector.Natural and AuthenticProduct development within the ready meals sector is increasingly being informed by a demand for products that feature flavors and nutritional aspects that consumers perceive as being natural and authentic, as well as convenient.Click to Enlarge“Natural is the prerequisite when it comes to food and drinks. People increasingly scrutinize products, demanding natural and sustainably sourced ingredients. Quality and taste perception are directly linked to sourcing and processing,” Simone Ehbrecht (pictured left), Director Marketing Category Culinary EAME, Symrise Flavors Division, tells FoodIngredientsFirst.“Nowadays consumers are more concerned about what they eat,” says Claudia Crepaldi, Global Business Food Manager, Biorgin. Consumers look for meals that are low in sodium content and contain natural ingredients that deliver a fresh, homemade flavor.This demand for convenient ready meals that still feel authentic and home-made is also increasingly reflected in the way these items are being packaged: A point in case is the separation of the individual components of ready meals, allowing consumers to customize or adjust the ways they serve their meals. “Once we would have bought goulash, ready made in its sauce. Today, the meat and sauce are presented separately, and it is down to the consumer to combine the two components. The benefits of this approach are clear: By seeing the individual components of the meal, the customer can clearly determine whether they are fresh or not. In addition, customers can adapt the meal to their own personal taste,” says Marcus Leben, member of the convenience team at Frutarom Savory Solutions.Ironically, by improving aspects such as shelf life, technological advancements play a large role in providing consumers with ready meals that have a natural and authentic feel.“Modern technologies offer us increasing scope to meet consumer demands with regard to flavor, texture, color and naturalness. They allow us to produce the required consistency and colors more authentically and naturally than even five or ten years ago,” Leben says.Sustainability and Health ConsciousnessWith consumer expectations regarding the health and sustainability aspects of their meals increasing, marketing around sourcing and sustainability is becoming a pre-requisite.“Sustainability has long been an abstract concept, hard to grasp and related to special markets in Western Europe. Now, people want to know where their food comes from and how it was made – transparency takes center stage,” Ehbrecht says.People are increasingly recognizing the interconnectedness and limitations of our world, the impact of their consumption behavior on both the planet and their own bodies, and that they can make a difference.The “zero food waste” movement, as well as the more conscious consumption of meat are two reflections of this increased awareness of sustainability. The widened range of reduced meat options follows an increase in popularity of diets such as flexitarianism or semi-vegitarianism, whereby people mainly eat a plant-based diet but occasionally consume meat products.According to data from Innova Market Insights, 9% of global launches in 2016 were specifically positioned on a vegetarian platform, an increase of 85% since 2011. Ready meals featuring the term “vegan,” meanwhile, accounted for 4.5% of the total global launches in 2016, up from just 1.1% in 2011. Following on this trend, vegan labeling and certification schemes are becoming increasingly common across a range of product sectors.Flavor TrendsGlobalization is not just informing consumers’ views on sustainability, but also their appetites for new flavors and cuisines. In terms of flavor trends and culinary products, a number of trends stand out, with regional cuisines, rather than single flavor trends, quickly gaining favor with consumers.“Those upcoming cuisines are e.g. Portugal, Georgia, Laos, Burma, Malaysia, Taiwan, the Philippines, Indian Thali, Brazilian and Mexican regional (Yucatan). Of course, migration streams bring new impetus that lets people discover unknown cuisines,” Ehbrecht says. “North African and Middle Eastern spices and condiments such as sumac, saffron, harissa, baharat, ras el hanout and Indian rending curry get more and more trendy and find their way to Europe and the US.”“Globalization continues to influence consumer preferences, leading to the remixing and combining of disparate cuisines, techniques and ingredients. New and interesting fusion cuisines include “East Meets East,” e.g. combining Korean and Polish cuisines, and “East Meets West,” e.g. fusing Italian and Chinese cuisines, she adds.Click to EnlargeOther key trends are flavors from the Americas, including chillies and BBQ, trends that began in the USA and are attracting increasing consumer interest in Europe. “In particular, BBQ smoking in combination with spices of different strengths is experiencing a major spike in popularity,” Leben says.“Of all the many and various chilli varieties, jalapeño, chipotle and habanero stand out. Chilli’s consistent and growing popularity can be combined very effectively with other key trends this year, for example when used as a flavor-enhancing ingredient in hybrid product concepts and for authentic, exotic dishes,” says Sascha Thaens, Director Sales Management & Strategy, RAPS GmbH & Co. KG (pictured right).Clear LabelingAlong with the demand for natural and authentic ingredients, clear and simplified labeling has become more important than ever, with consumers closely inspecting product labels and educating themselves on all things diet-related. The consensus among industry experts seems to be that for the modern consumer, “less is definitely more” when it comes to ingredient lists.“Consumers have raised their expectations around food standards. In order to properly understand what they are eating, people demand transparency: things like clear labelling; no unnecessary artificial additions; products made from pure, familiar ingredients,” says Jan Derk ter Keurst, Sales Manager at Scelta Mushrooms.One noteworthy trend is the increase in non-GMO labeling. According to Innova Market Insight data, just under 5% of global launches in the ready meals category used Non-GMO claims, rising to over 15% in the US. The popularity of non-GMO claims in the food and drinks sector as a whole has bolstered the Non-GMO Project Verification program in the US, which tests whether a product meets the defined standards for the presence of GMOs. Although verification programs are not always mandatory, “given the negative image of genetic engineering, many food manufacturers are willing to provide their customers with this assurance – knowing that transparency about ingredients and clean product composition is becoming a stronger and stronger reason to buy,” says Thaens.Keeping the Good StuffOne of the challenges for food manufacturers is to provide ready meals that are less processed, yet still appealing in terms of flavor, texture and nutritional benefits.“Food developers need economical, highly functional and nutritious ingredients that are easy to incorporate into recipes, without additional capital investment or significant formulation changes,” says Tim Symons, Meat & Meal Sales Director at Archer Daniels Midland Company (ADM).Symons lists as examples of such ingredients functional soy proteins, which have the potential to aid water absorption as well as to deliver appealing flavors and textures, and textured vegetable proteins, which “impart juiciness into products by binding water and absorbing fat to provide a more appealing consumer product.”“Bean ingredients offer a virtually flavorless solution to increasing both protein and fiber contents in processed foods with one, clean-label and whole-food ingredient. Beans do not contain gluten, and can often be declared as ‘Gluten-free,’ beans are not listed allergens and being highly nutritious, they are an ideal choice for use in products targeting health, wellbeing and weight reduction,” Symons says.Reformulation and ingredient swaps are also key strategies used to address health concerns surrounding the (over)consumption of sugar, salt and fat. “Vegetable oils, especially rapeseed oil or olive oil, play an increasingly important role, as they are considered to be very healthy and environmentally-friendly. In the same vein, fish oils are seen as extremely valuable, and are increasingly used in the preparation of ready meals,” Leben says.With busy lifestyles set to continue to define our eating habits, the popularity of ready meal options is not likely to wane. Still, consumer demands for sustainability, healthiness and transparency will provide producers with enough food for thought.“Consumers are far more aware of diet than they have ever been. Our challenge in the convenience sector is, above all, to provide solutions which safeguard product quality, whilst allowing clear, unambiguous labeling. The right approach is to move away from industry jargon, towards using ingredient names which end consumers understand and can relate to,” Leben concludes.by Lucy Gunn
As British MPs prepare to vote on Prime Minister Theresa May’s call for a June 8 general election later today, the food and farming industries are urging the UK government to support the sectors which are vital to the UK economy. May’s snap call for a general election is due to be backed by MPs this afternoon, so the UK government can make a success of Brexit and focus on negotiating the best deals as the country exits the European Union.But the sudden general election call has done nothing to allay the widespread food and agriculture industry concerns surrounding Brexit negotiations and how leaving the EU will affect farmers, imports, exports, jobs, tariffs, border controls, food prices, regulations and so on.The UK’s Food and Drink Federation and the National Farmers’ Union have both issued statements responding to the general election call and reiterating their stance on how important both sectors are for Britain.NFU President Meurig Raymond wants clarity as soon as possible because there have been concerns about the future of British farming and the food and drink industries in general for almost one year.Time and again, industry leaders have called for a clearer idea of what Brexit might mean and how food sectors will be impacted – but still there is no clarity.Yesterday, as May suddenly announced she would be calling for a general election because she wants to secure the backing of the UK population for Brexit negotiations, Raymond stressed the NFU’s stance.“With farming arguably the sector most impacted by Brexit, NFU members will want to understand how each of the political parties plans to support profitable, productive and progressive agriculture and horticulture in the future. The right post-Brexit trade deal is absolutely critical but equally so is a new wider policy framework that better delivers for farming and the nation,” he said.“Throughout the next seven weeks the NFU will ensure that all parties fully understand and engage with the food and farming community on the issues facing the sector both now and post-Brexit.”“British farms currently grow the raw ingredients for the UK food and drink manufacturing sector worth £108 billion and moreover the public want to continue to buy British food. For that to happen it’s vital that candidates recognize the enormous contribution that agriculture makes – for every £1 invested, farming delivers £7.40 back to this country – and to back British farming.”Responding to the sudden call for a general election, director general at the Food and Drink Federation, Ian Wright, said: “Alongside national security, any Government's primary duty is to ensure that the nation has access to safe, affordable and nutritious food and drink so our country can continue to prosper.Over the next six weeks all those who aspire to form the next Government have a duty to spell out in very clear terms their vision for the nation's food and farming policy for the post Brexit generation.”“We look forward to a proper public debate on those ideas. As the voice of the UK's food and drink manufacturers, FDF is ready to play its part. We will work with the new Government and with our friends in farming, food retailing, and the out of home sector to ensure that outside the EU the United Kingdom has the vibrant and diverse food industry which UK consumers expect and deserve.”“Part of this process will involve creating an industrial strategy partnership that supports growth and productivity in our sector, ensuring we retain our world-class reputation and competitive advantage internationally.”It had been thought the next general election in Britain would not be until 2020, however the Fixed Term Parliaments Act allows for one to be held earlier if two-thirds of MPs support the move which is viewed by some as a U-turn from May who has previously claimed there would not be an early general election.However, a motion will be put before the House of Commons later this afternoon (Apr 19), which has also been welcomed by opposition parties, Labour and Liberal Democrats."What I hope comes out of the election is support from the public to say we agree with their plan for Brexit, so that when I go into Europe I've got that backing of the British people," says May, who became PM following David Cameron’s resignation in July last year after the British public voted to come out of Europe during a referendum vote.She also said that if a general election were to be left until 2020, it could get in the way of Brexit negotiations because the deadline for the arduous talks is March 2019."If we're negotiating at a point that is quite close to a general election, I think the Europeans might have seen that as a time of weakness when they could push us. Now we will be much freer,” she adds.The last general election in the UK was in May, 2015.Meanwhile, Sustain, the alliance for better food and agriculture practices, has stated that it expects party manifestos for the General Election to stipulate how parties intend to “use the UK’s new post-Brexit freedoms to take back control of our food, farming and fishing,” with possible commitments including the introduction of a Sustainable Fisheries Act, the development of UK commitments to improve child health (such as the Soft Drinks Industry Levy), the expansion of domestic organic production, and improvements in food labeling to to help consumers make informed food choices.By Gaynor Selby
Scientists have created the most accurate navigation system for the bread wheat genome to date – allowing academics and breeders to analyze its genes more easily than ever before.Wheat is one of the world's most important staple cereals but is also the most complex. Three sub-genomes together contain around five times more DNA than the human genome. Nearly 80% of this genetic material is repetitive, making it even harder to sequence and analyze.Now, harnessing advanced sequencing technology and computational approaches, scientists from the Earlham Institute, with colleagues at the John Innes Centre, have published the world's most complete picture of the wheat genome. It includes the location and detailed annotation of over 100,000 wheat genes. More than a fifth (22%) of these were completely absent from earlier assemblies, or found only as fragments."We applied the latest sequencing and bioinformatic techniques we have developed at our institute to the huge and complex wheat genome. We were able to achieve the best results anyone had seen, including uncovering previously hidden genes," says senior author Matthew Clark, Head of Technology Development at the Earlham Institute (EI)."Moreover, all our methods are open, and available for anyone to use. This is critical as wheat DNA varies across the world, which is key to its success in different environments. We have already started to sequence many varieties of UK wheat using these methods, and we hope others will sequence the genomes of wheat important in their country," he says.The results, published in Genome Research, focus on the variety called Chinese Spring -- the standard cultivar for genomic research. The genome and annotation have been accessed more than any other resource on the genomic portal Plant Ensembl , where they have been available for a over year for thousands of researchers and breeders to use. The project was funded by Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research council grants to EI, John Innes Centre (JIC), European Bioinformatics Institute and Rothamsted Research, with contributions from international partners at the PSGB (Munich, Germany) and University Of Western Australia.The improved genome assembly combined with high quality sequencing data and novel methods allowed EI scientists to more accurately identify genes and areas of the genome with interesting functions. In previous assemblies, many genes were missing or found only as fragments. By identifying the entire DNA sequences of genes, EI scientists have made it possible to identify more complete sets of similar genes -- called gene families -- that are important for yield, disease resistance or other qualities important for agriculture.EI scientists have already used the advances to explore UK varieties and they have released six wheat genomes on the EI's open data website Grassroots Genomics. They and scientists from the John Innes Centre and The Sainsbury Laboratory have also started to use the results to provide a more accurate picture of where to find disease resistance genes and genes important for the visco-elastic properties of bread - which make it soft and spongy.More than two billion people worldwide rely on wheat as a staple food, making it a vital crop for global food security. However, yield increases have stagnated since the mid-1990s. A better map of the wheat genome is essential for breaking the deadlock. It will help reveal the location of important traits that can be bred into elite varieties.Lead author Bernardo Clavijo from the Earlham Institute says: "Scientists all over the world are already using these new results. But even more importantly, our open methods allow a new level of accuracy for any wheat line, and many other complex genomes. Assembly for this complexity of genome has always been a bit of a one-off work of art. Now we have a way to do it reliably and to a standard that enables thorough analysis.""We are moving towards a scenario where more and more wheat lines will be sequenced and compared using these and similar techniques. This kind of detail on every wheat line will enable new discoveries and accelerate breeding. We are already working with the breeding industry as well as other researchers to enable more detailed analysis of elite varieties, which will impact the wheat breeding programs directly."Ksenia Krasileva, a co-author on the new study, likens the creation of an assembly to navigating using GPS: "Breeders might know there is something really useful in wheat, for example for protecting crops against disease or for improving gluten for bread-making, but without a good quality genome assembly it's like driving through thick fog. Full genome assembly and annotating genes provides a sat nav view of wheat genes to signpost the way to useful genes in all varieties of the species."EI group leader David Swarbreck says: "This is the most comprehensive wheat gene annotation to date, it represents a significant advance that will assist wheat breeders and researchers in accelerating further improvements, particularly as the results are freely available for anyone to use."Co-author Michael Bevan from the John Innes Centre says: "The new resources we have helped develop have already broken down barriers and are providing new ways of studying wheat. They will allow breeders to more accurately predict which lines to breed from, and to directly identify the most promising progeny. This could save years when making new varieties."
Mondelez International is shaking up its leadership with the announcement that executive vice president of North America Roberto Marques is leaving his role and Tim Cofer will step in as interim president adding to his current role spearheading the company’s global growth strategy.Mondelez International says it will recruit a permanent successor to lead the region."Over the past two years under Roberto Marques' leadership, the North American team has been executing a large transformation, which has resulted in significant progress on our margin agenda, while stepping up our participation in growth areas such as Well-being, broader channel penetration, especially in eCommerce, as well as entering the U.S. Chocolate market," said Irene Rosenfeld, Chairman and CEO. "We appreciate Roberto's many contributions and wish him well in his future endeavors."Cofer has been with the company for 25 years, leading regions in Europe, Asia Pacific and Eastern Europe, Middle East and Africa, expanding market shares and driving long-term growth, having previously led two Kraft North American businesses, Oscar Mayer and Kraft Pizza Company."Tim Cofer is our most experienced commercial leader with deep region leadership experience across both developed and emerging markets. We have considerable competitive advantages in North America, including our strong margin profile, iconic brands, solid innovation pipeline and strong Direct-Store-Delivery muscle," said Rosenfeld."We are very fortunate to have an experienced leader like Tim to take on the additional responsibility of leading North America, while also continuing to architect our global growth agenda.""While mobilizing our enterprise growth agenda remains a top priority for both me and the company, I'm looking forward to leading the North America business on an interim basis and working with the team to capitalize on the potential of our business in the U.S. and Canada," added Cofer.Marques will work with Cofer over the next few weeks during a transition period.Meanwhile, executives of Mondelez International recently provided an update on the company's strategic plans during a presentation at the Consumer Analysts Group of New York conference. The detailed plan to expand margins and accelerate revenue growth includes contemporizing the company's core business, innovating to expand into new consumer need states and geographies, and ensuring that our brands are available whenever and wherever people shop.The company will release its first quarter financial results in early May.
What happens when meat scientists get their hands on nearly 8,000 commercially raised pigs? They spend a year running dozens of tests and crunching numbers to arrive at research-backed management recommendations for pork producers.“We had an opportunity to answer a lot of questions for the pork industry,” says Dustin Boler, assistant professor in the animal sciences department at the University of Illinois.Anna Dilger, an associate professor in the department, explains their approach. “The two main questions were, ‘Can I measure quality in one part of the pig and predict quality in the rest of it?’ And then, ‘What is the true variability in pork quality out there and what’s causing it?’”The team, which also included U of I graduate students, USDA meat science researchers, and a representative from Smithfield Foods, recently published their findings in five articles.In the first article, the team looked at correlations between loin quality and quality of the belly and ham from the same pig. In this case, quality was defined mostly by color and tenderness. “Color is what drives whether or not a consumer purchases a particular pork chop. It translates into what we think of as purchase intent. Color is always number one,” Boler says. “After that, we look at whether a product is tender. If it is tender enough, we think that will translate into a repeat purchase.”Unfortunately, the team found no correlation between loin quality and the quality of other cuts. “Just because a loin has desirable color and is tender doesn’t mean the same animal is going to produce a good belly for bacon or a great ham for a special dinner. It didn’t. Hypothesis one: scratched,” Boler reports.The remainder of the articles focused on understanding the variability in pork products – how much variability exists, and where it comes from. For example, one of the articles focused on barrows (castrated male pigs) and gilts (young, prebred female pigs).“We know barrows and gilts are different, but we wanted to know if they differ in how variable they are, or if one produces a more consistent product,” Dilger explains. “You can deal with differences. It’s harder to deal with variability.”Traits associated with fatness, such as marbling, were more variable in barrows than in gilts, but the sexes varied to approximately the same degree in terms of muscling and lean quality. Based on these results, Dilger says that barrows and gilts probably do not need to be managed differently unless producers are targeting a very specific branded product.In another article, the researchers admit they had to channel their inner statistics geeks. They looked at every possible aspect of pork quality and tried to pinpoint the major sources of variability in the dataset, from season, production focus, marketing group, and sex to variation within individual animals. In the end, those individual differences accounted for the largest portion of the variability.“A lot of factors turn a pig into pork,” Boler notes. “In the pig’s journey from the farm to his ultimate fate, a lot of things happen. Whether he got in an argument with other pigs on the truck, whether he had to walk a long or a short distance, how much rest he was given at the plant, what kind of experience he had during termination, how that carcass was cooled. All these things can independently influence the products derived from that pig.”Finding that the majority of the variability was within individual pigs and not in any particular management practice is good news for producers.“It means the things they’re doing to deal with the variability in their environment are just fine. They don’t need to stop doing any of those things,” Dilger says. “There are things in the industry that get picked on. One of those is pigs raised in the summer. People think, ‘Ah, they’re so bad, so slow.’ But no, they’re fine. Gilts get blamed for a lot of things, too, but in the end, they’re fine. We’re not going to get rid of young female pigs or the summer. I believe we’re stuck with those. Understanding the variability and differences allows you to better manage the system.”The articles discussed here, “Pork loin quality is not indicative of fresh belly or fresh and cured ham quality,” “Comparison of variability in pork carcass composition and quality between barrows and gilts,” and “Characterization of variability in pork carcass composition and primal quality,” are published in the Journal of Animal Science. Two additional articles resulting from the project are also published in the journal. The project was funded by The National Pork Board.Reference:Arkfeld, E. K., D. A. Mohrhauser, D. A. King, T. L. Wheeler, A. C. Dilger, S. D. Shackelford, and D. D. Boler. 2017. Characterization of variability in pork carcass composition and primal quality123. J. Anim. Sci. 95:697-708. doi:10.2527/jas.2016.1097
The UK’s iconic cereal brand Weetabix is reportedly being swallowed up by US Post Holdings in a £1.4 billion (US$1.7 million) deal. Chinese owners, The Bright Group, took a 60% share in Weetabix in May 2012 with Baring Private Equity Asia acquiring the remaining 40% from Lion Capital in 2015.Speculation has been mounting since the beginning of the year after reports in January claimed a potential four bidders – including Post Holdings, Associated British Food, Cereal Partners Worldwide and Italian pasta maker Barilla – were looking into buying Weetabix.But now, one of the best-loved breakfast cereals in Britain, is to be sold with Reuters reporting that a spokesman for the Chinese conglomerate has confirmed the sale today (April 18).If the sale goes through, this would be the end of Chinese ownership. When The Bright Group first took over, the idea was to push the oval-shaped high-fiber breakfast cereal in potentially lucrative Asian markets, something which has not really been successful in recent years as consumers are not traditionally used to eating cold breakfast cereals with milk.Headquartered in Missouri, US, Post Holdings Inc., is a consumer packaged goods holding company active in the foodservice, ingredients, private label, refrigerated and nutrition categories and also makes other cereals popular in the US including Cocoa Pebbles and Golden Crisp.FoodIngredientsFirstreached out for comment from Weetabix and Post Holdings earlier today but neither was immediately available.Earlier this year, we also reported how Weetabix announced a £30 million (US$37 million) capital investment program across its British manufacturing sites to create new production capacity by 2018 to keep pace with increasing sales domestically and overseas. The investment came on the back of Weetabix’s UK market share for cereals and drinks rising from 15.3% to 16.4% in the past year.Currently the UK cereal is manufactured in Northamptonshire and exported to more than 80 countries worldwide, while Weetabix for the US and Canadian markets is manufactured in Ontario.By Gaynor Selby
Texture makes foods and beverages vividly memorable and enjoyable. It's in line with taste in defining the eating and drinking experience.Ingredionhas more than 60 years’ experience in texturizing food and beverages. The company’s' extensive product portfolio offers a wide choice of texturizing ingredients, including base viscosifiers and co-texturizers, as well as gelling, crisping and pulping agents – all are used to create different textures and claims.The growing research focused around how people manipulate food in their mouths has led to a better modern-day understanding of sensory perception. In fact, four breakthrough studies in this field have helped form Ingredion's current understanding of eating styles and how they apply to recipe formulation in any food category.FoodIngedientsFirstcaught up with Severine Bensa, European Marketing Manager for Texture at Ingredion, who discusses developments in the world of sensory experience and their impact on product development. “Consumers are constantly seeking new and exciting eating and drinking experiences,” she explains. “For a long time, we believed that flavor dictated our everyday eating habits, actually other senses, in particular mouthfeel play a critical role.”Health and nutrition is certainly trending: “Consumers want low sugar, low fat, protein-enriched, nutritionally functional products with a premium texture,” she claims.Bensa notes that sugar reduction is high on the agenda for consumers and manufacturers: “Sugar is the new fat. It can be quite challenging to reduce the amount of sugar in a recipe. When you remove sugar you are also removing some of the texture consumers have come to expect in the product so you need to make sure you can replace it, while ensuring it tastes as it should.”Which is more challenging – taste or texture? “They are both equally as challenging, but rebuilding the texture, while ensuring the end product achieves a specific, desired label claim, requires a more technical focus. Therefore depending on the ingredients you want to add to your existing recipe and the type of application you are reformulating, you must consider the personal preferences of consumers not only in texture, but in terms of ‘on pack’ label claims,” she says.Ingredion recently launched a new research report into texture and consumer eating styles exploring how the physical way consumers eat influences their food preferences and satisfaction levels.“An area of particular interest has been in the snacking category,” Bensa states. “From cookies to cakes, and chips to sweets, consumers know what they want from a snacking experience. Using our ingredients, manufacturers are able to creative innovative, new textures to enhance the sensory experience of their products. For instance, this includes anything from a very light coated peanut, to a hard and crunchy shell,” she adds.“There are many products on the market offering different textures for both sweet and savory foods. Confectionary is one area to watch in this development,” Bensa claims. “Once manufacturers have established what is it that consumers want, only then can they develop new products that answer those needs.”“Countless psychological and emotional studies have shown that a combination of sight, smell, sound, touch, taste and emotions play a critical role in our enjoyment of food,” says Bensa. “Significant data has emerged suggesting that texture (mouthfeel) is the new taste and an integral factor in consumer preference.”“When you ask consumers what they like about a certain food, the first thing they point to is its taste or flavor. However, when you ask what it is that they don’t like about a product, they’ll point to its texture,” she continues, “It is this that we have found particularly interesting and an area we’re keen to explore further.”According to Bensa, consumers not only have a low awareness of texture, but have a subconscious habit of manipulating food in their mouths, and an inability to accurately articulate texture preference. As a result, manufacturers face the challenge of creating innovative consumer winning products, without sufficient knowledge of their target consumers’ textural needs. “If the texture of the finished product doesn’t align with consumers’ preferences, many won’t repeat the purchase,” she adds.“Using a sample of 500 individuals and a typing tool called Jeltema/Beckley Mouth Behavior (JBMB - Copyright 2016 – The Understanding & Insight Group, LLC.), U&I first proved that texture perception differs according to the individual’s predisposed mouth behaviour and way they manipulate foods in the mouth. U&I then theorised four primary mouth behaviour groups: Crunchers, Chewers, Smooshers and Suckers. Ingredion built upon this research, extending it to include emotional drivers, consumer research and other sensory analysis to define four different eating styles. So, what started out as a hypothesis in 2001, is now a proven model and methodology for profiling consumers’ unexpressed texture preference. One that any food producer can use to better understand consumer preference in relation to texture.”CrunchersThese individuals eat their food forcefully and want to be able to crunch until it’s gone. They are often the fastest eaters of all four groups, using a more aggressive mouth action – even when eating soft foods. Recipes targeted at this group should fracture upon biting, although fellow diners are likely to notice that they eat loudly.ChewersConsumers belonging to this group like the sensation of chewing and look for a certain amount of fullness in the mouth when they find a food that is particularly satisfying. These individuals can be either short or long chewers, but what they have in common is a dislike of food that easily breaks up. To counteract this, they’ll attempt to turn the food into a moist mass so that they can enjoy chewing for longer.SmooshersIn many ways, this group has the most interesting of eating styles. Smooshers are the arch manipulators of food, using both their tongue and palate to mash the food into a soft mass that can be held in the mouth for a long time. They don’t enjoy chewing, but they do like to turn crunchy foods into a ‘smoosh’ that can be spread throughout the mouth. As such, they process and eat foods slowly.SuckersThese individuals are preoccupied with sucking out the flavor before chewing or swallowing. They enjoy foods that can be processed in this way for a long time and tend to be slow eaters. Foods that can’t be sucked will be chewed, but not enjoyed at the same level as ones that can be sucked. This group prefers harder foods that they can hold in their mouths for prolonged periods.“Each consumer is different. They eat differently and will be satisfied by different types of textures. Therefore manufacturers must ensure that their products meet the unexpressed texture preference of their target consumers,” Bensa explains.Ingredion intends to continue its research into eating styles and consumer preferences. “This is our latest piece of research on consumer insights in sensory experiences, and we do plan to do more studies on new trends. Sensory Experience is a platform that we want to develop more moving forward into 2017 and beyond.”“The savory snacking area will grow significantly in the next years,” she notes. “We are currently working on some new launches, which are delivering innovative, new textures for snacks. We will be showcasing them at FIE later in the year where we will have concepts that demonstrate our expertise in texture and sensory experience as a whole.”“We are always looking to further extend our offerings in or sensory experiences. For example, vegan food is another area which can be challenging but where there are a wealth of opportunities for texture development. We are continuing to work with manufacturers to incorporate vegetable proteins into formulations, while maintaining the deliciousness of food and the overall eating experience,” Bensa finalizes.by Elizabeth Kenward
Fair trade products within the seafood industry are now on the rise in the U.S., thanks to a growth in consumer interest about how fish and shellfish arrive on their plate.Fair trade certification status, which is conferred by independent groups to denote environmental sustainability and fair working conditions, has been around for years, but the fish and shellfish industry is only just starting to catch up.The move ties in with a general shift towards sustainability in the seafood industry. Many companies are now taking steps to ensure their products are sourced sustainably with consumer demand also driving this trend.“Certification of seafood products, including tuna and shrimp, began in 2014, and the volume of imports of such products grew more than 350 percent last year to more than 1.2 million pounds (500,000 kilograms)”, said Fair Trade USA, a California-based nonprofit group.The first company to offer fair trade seafood harvested from U.S. waters will have scallops on the market this month. The company, Bristol Seafood of Portland, Maine, is looking to capitalize on the growing interest in authenticity of seafood, said its president, Peter Handy.“There's a certain sanctity to food when it comes to the story about it,” he said.“It tastes better the more you know.”Independent groups, including Fair Trade USA, provide certifications to a host of products that people buy in stores, ranging from fruit and nuts to home goods. The certification is most commonly associated with coffee, which launched the fair trade movement in the 1990s.To achieve certification, companies need to submit to an audit and interviews to make sure the food is produced with fair working conditions and environmental stewardship along the supply chain.Packaged products can then bear a "Fair Trade Certified" seal, which carries a price premium. Fair Trade USA currently certifies shrimp from Mexico, yellowfin tuna from Indonesia, and skipjack and yellowfin tuna from Maldives. It is the only group currently certifying seafood as fair trade, representatives for the nonprofit said.
The soft drinks industry at large has been facing the sugar tax challenge for several years now against a backdrop of consumer demand for reduced-sugar products and increasing calls for governments to legislate on the issue. Reformulating a much-loved product by removing or replacing the sugar, while maintaining the familiar taste is a challenge for most companies. But that has not stopped the majority of key players from adding a wealth of no- or low-sugar lines to their portfolios.But one recent case in point demonstrates that industry doesn’t always get it right. Consumer acceptance is the ultimate benchmark.Stevia-packed low sugar Coca Cola Life is to be phased out in Britain in June after sales of the soft drink have nosedived. The move comes as Coca-Cola increases its investment in Coca-Cola Zero Sugar as part of its on-going zero sugary strategy, canning the stevia drink in the process.Click to EnlargeAccording to Coca-Cola, this will allow the company to “simplify consumer choice between sugar and sugar-free formats” as it continues to focus on the growth of Coca-Cola Zero Sugar and Diet Coke.Nevertheless it does show that consumers didn’t really take to the distinctive green-label version as much as Coca-Cola would have hoped. Indeed consumer uptake has not met expectation, sales have been flagging and distribution was pulled back over the last year. The variant has built a “loyal and niche” following during that time, accounting for just under one per cent of the Coca-Cola trademark sales, according to the drinks giant, but that’s nowhere near enough to justify a continuation of the line.And so it will be no more, in the UK at least. This is what can happen when the consumer is not satisfied with taste.Of course the reason why the global soft drinks industry is working so hard on low sugar reformulations is, in part, a reaction to sugar taxes popping up all over the world, driven by the notion that cutting sugar in soda is the answer to the world’s obesity problems.This is still a highly questionable ethos; health organizations fully support it as do many others, while others sectors really do not believe that adding a levy on sugary soft drinks will not have any significant long-term impact on the number of overweight or obese people there are in any given population.Last year the UK government announced its forthcoming sugar levy could raise £520 million (US$665 million) in the first year. It will come into force in 2018, so fizzy drinks manufactures will have time to cut sugar levels if they want to avoid the tax, while the money raised will fund sport in schools for children, the government said. The tax will form part of the government’s overall Childhood obesity strategy.FoodIngredientsFirst spoke with the UK’s Food and Drink Federation to get its latest viewpoint on the issue.“We strongly believe that action is needed to tackle obesity. Equally, we believe that interventions shown by robust evidence to present the greatest chance of being effective should be adopted. For manufacturers, that means innovating to help lower calorie intakes,” a spokesperson says.“FDF has consistently said that a soft drinks levy is not a proven tool for achieving sustained calorie reduction in the national diet. Given the scant evidence to support its introduction combined with the period of huge uncertainty the country is currently experiencing, we would stress the importance of the actual impact of this fiscal measure being closely monitored and evaluated.”UNESDA – which represents the European soft drinks industry which comprises: still drinks, cordials, dilutables, carbonates, fruit drinks, energy drinks, iced teas and coffees, squashes and sports drinks – echoes the FDF’s point.“Taxation is the wrong tool to address obesity and make our diets healthier,” it says.“The impact of food taxes is unpredictable and can result in product substitutions to other food and drink categories containing similar or higher calories, thereby negating any positive health impact.”“It’s tempting to single out soft drinks but the reality is much more complex.”UNESDA data shows that over the past decade while obesity rates have increased, the contribution of soft drinks to the daily calories intake in Europe has decreased to just 3%. The average calories per 100ml has gone down by 11.5% and the availability of smaller pack sizes has gone up by 150%. Meanwhile no- and low-calorie drinks account for up to 30% of sales in many markets.“There is no correlation between soft drinks consumption and obesity levels,” UNESDA adds.Children’s consumption of soft drinks in the Netherlands is five times higher than in Greece, yet obesity and overweight rates are three times lower.Even if soft drink companies and the organizations representing them do not believe there is a real link between sugar reduction and obesity levels, it is not stopping the reformulation drive and new product developments hitting the shelves.Britvic has been a critic of the UK sugary drinks tax but is doing very well with its plans to reformulate ahead of time.There has been good growth in its sugary drinks division largely driven by an increase in sales of Pepsi Max and 7UP Free with its “no sugar, no caffeine” label.Paul Graham, managing director GB at Britvic recently said: “We’re starting to see real change in consumer tastes this year, which is driving sales in low and no sugar products as well as a strong demand for premium drinks.”And industry is being put under further pressure as other initiatives to cut the amount of sugar in the nation’s diet are gaining momentum.Last Friday (April 21) the NHS in England and Wales said it was stepping up its obesity, diabetes and tooth decay efforts, by announcing that sugary drinks will be banned in hospital shops beginning from next year unless suppliers voluntarily take decisive action to cut their sales over the next 12 months.NHS England said that leading retailers have agreed to continue voluntarily reducing sales of sugary drinks to 10% or less of their total drinks sales within hospitals over the coming year. WH Smith, Marks & Spencer, Greggs, the Subway brand, Medirest, ISS and the Royal Voluntary Service are the leading suppliers who have so far pledged to cut sales.“Remaining retailers are now being urged to join them in order to kick-start a major health drive and ensure the NHS leads the way on tackling the devastating impact of the country’s sweet tooth on public health,” says NHS England.However, it is important to note that NHS England’s efforts to reduce sugar are not just singling out soft drinks. There are also plans to build on this and by April 2018 hospitals must make further efforts, including; 60% of confectionery and sweets stocked do not exceed 250 kcal, rising to 80 per cent of confectionery and sweets in 2018/19; 60% of pre-packed sandwiches and other savory pre-packed meals to contain 400 kcal or less per serving and do not exceed five grams of saturated fat per 100g, moving to 75 per cent in 2018/19.“A spoonful of sugar may help the medicine go down but spoonfuls of added sugar day-in, day-out mean serious health problems. Its’ great that following discussion with NHS England, big name retailers are agreeing to take decisive action, which helps send a powerful message to the public and NHS staff about the link between sugar and obesity, diabetes and tooth decay,” says NHS England Chief Executive, Simon Stevens.What about the latest numbers?Across the Atlantic and Berkeley, California, was the first US city to introduce a sugar tax in March 2015 in a bid to reduce obesity – and just earlier this month the first set of results came in.According to a recent study, taxes on sugary sweetened drinks have indeed brought consumption down, while sales of water have increased. One year after the introduction of the tax, sales of sugary drinks fell by 9.6%, compared with sales in surrounding area where there was no levy going up by 6.9%.Commenting on the evaluation of sugary drink taxes in Berkeley, published in the PLOS Medicine, Nancy Brown, American Heart Association CEO, describes it as compelling evidence that cannot be ignored.“The residents of Berkeley, who voted for a sugary drink tax in their community, are now seeing the benefits of significantly reduced consumption of sugary drinks, significantly increased consumption of water and consumers are switching to healthier drinks. Additionally, Berkeley small businesses have not seen a drop in overall sales. This positive impact is magnified by the fact that the revenue from the tax is being invested in health and wellness across the city.”“I urge the beverage industry to pay attention to this growing evidence and embrace these policies that benefit the health of communities, local businesses, their company employees and the very customers they serve. By doing so even more communities, and especially children, will experience a lifetime of health benefits. Spending millions to fight local citizens working tirelessly to improve their community puts the beverage industry on the wrong side of health and history.”Mexico was an early adopter of the soda sugar tax in a bid to stem massive consumption linked to obesity and imposed a peso per liter excise tax at the beginning of 2014. Mexicans also cut their soda purchases by 5.5% in the first year and by almost 10% in the second year, according to one study.No doubt the debate will rage on and sugar taxes will continue to be levied as a solution to public health problems – and the soft drinks industry will continue to respond. It will be interesting to see the results of studies in five or ten years’ time. Is this demonization of sugar in soft drinks destined to continue? Will the soft drinks sector by singled out, or will the tax trend ripple through other food and drink categories with the same conviction?Whatever the answer to these questions, new product developments – successful and not so – will continue to be launched from the soft drinks giants as well as the smaller niche players.The consumer will ultimately decide.By Gaynor Selby
Bunge Southern Cone and Aceitera Martínez S.A. have entered into an agreement to transfer all of Aceitera Martínez’s assets to Bunge. A family-run business for more than 60 years, Aceitera Martínez specializes in the production and packaging of edible oils, including sunflower and soybean oil.The acquisition covers all of the oil company’s assets and includes a modern production plant located in San Jerónimo Sud, near Bunge’s refining center In Argentina. The facilities, equipped with state-of-the-art technology and three packaging lines, have an installed capacity of approximately 20,000 tons per month."This acquisition allows us to strengthen our value-added position in the agrifood chain and ratifies Bunge’s deepClick to Enlargecommitment to national production," said Enrique Humanes, CEO of Bunge Southern Cone.“In the coming years, our commitment will be to meet the demand for higher value-added products, expand our portfolio and generate a more appropriate asset allocation, all of which responds to Bunge’s strategic vision for our Food & Ingredients business.”Founded by Don Agustín Vicente Martínez, Aceitera Martínez has been dedicated to providing edible oils to food houses and warehouses for decades and today, with more than 50 years of experience and trajectory, the company continues in the Argentine market as well as abroad with its own brands, Alsamar and Siglo de Oro.
The NHS has announced it is “stepping up the battle against obesity, diabetes and tooth decay” by declaring that sugary drinks will be banned in hospital shops from next year unless suppliers voluntarily take decisive action to cut their sales over the next 12 months.The organization says that leading retailers have already agreed to continue voluntarily reducing sales of sugary drinks to 10 percent or less of their total drinks sales within hospitals over the coming year.WH Smith, Marks & Spencer, Greggs, the SUBWAY brand, Medirest, ISS and the Royal Voluntary Service are among the leading suppliers who have today pledged to cut sales.Remaining retailers are now being urged to join them.NHS England Chief Executive, Simon Stevens, said: “A spoonful of sugar may help the medicine go down but spoonfuls of added sugar day-in, day-out mean serious health problems.”He added, “It’s great that following discussion with NHS England, big name retailers are agreeing to take decisive action, which helps send a powerful message to the public and NHS staff about the link between sugar and obesity, diabetes and tooth decay.”In response to the announcement, Gavin Partington, Director General at the British Soft Drinks Association said that it makes sense to promote sales of healthier options in hospitals, but said the NHS shouldn’t focus on soft drinks, “the only food and drink category which has seen a significant reduction in consumer sugar intake, down by over 18% since 2012.”“It’s also worth remembering that while sugar intake from soft drinks has been falling, obesity levels have been increasing,” he added.Partington continued, saying, “However, it's good to see NHS England taking a pragmatic approach to the issue by including all drinks that contain added sugar - milk-based drinks and coffee - but still allowing consumers a variety of options.”Members of Health charities and bodies responded positively, with Katherine Button, the Campaign for Better Hospital Food coordinator, saying: “We are delighted that NHS England has taken such decisive action to reduce the sale of sugary drinks in hospitals.”“NHS hospitals are trusted by patients, families and staff to keep them fit and well and NHS England is helping everyone to take a big healthy step in the right direction,” she said.Malcolm Clarke of the Children's Food Campaign also applauded the NHS’s decision, saying, “With a clear target on reducing sugary drinks sales in hospitals and a specific sanction on retailers in place should that not be met, the NHS is living up to its public health leadership role.”However, he warned that the NHS’s sugar reduction efforts, and those of health professionals, charities and parents across the country, could be hampered if the Government does not introduce a sugary drinks tax as planned.“The Prime Minister must ensure that the Soft Drinks Industry Levy continues to be part of the Finance Bill when it is debated in the Commons on Tuesday 25 April, and is passed into law before the dissolution of Parliament,” Clarke stated.
Michigan State University researchers have shown that sunflower seeds are frequently contaminated with a toxin produced by molds and pose an increased health risk in many low-income countries worldwide.In the current issue of PLoS ONE, the team of scientists documented frequent occurrence of aflatoxin - a toxin produced by Aspergillus molds that commonly infect corn, peanuts, pistachios and almonds - in sunflower seeds and their products. This is one of the first studies to associate aflatoxin contamination with sunflower seeds.The study was conducted in Tanzania, but the problem is by no means isolated there. Chronic exposure to aflatoxin causes an estimated 25,000-155,000 deaths worldwide each year, from corn and peanuts alone. Since it is one of the most potent liver carcinogens known, the research to detect and limit its presence in sunflower seeds and their products could help save lives and reduce liver disease in areas where sunflowers and their byproducts are consumed, said Gale Strasburg, MSU food science and human nutrition professor and one of the study's co-authors."These high aflatoxin levels, in a commodity frequently consumed by the Tanzanian population, indicate that local authorities must implement interventions to prevent and control aflatoxin contamination along the sunflower commodity value chain, to enhance food and feed safety in Tanzania," he said. "Follow-up research is needed to determine intake rates of sunflower seed products in humans and animals, to inform exposure assessments and to better understand the role of sunflower seeds and cakes as a dietary aflatoxin source."Smallholder farmers in Tanzania grow sunflowers for the seeds, which are sold to local millers who press the seeds for oil and sell it to local consumers for cooking. The remaining cakes are used as animal feed.The seeds become infected by Aspergillus flavus or Aspergillus parasiticus, molds that produce aflatoxin. This contamination has been well studied in other crops, but there is little research published on sunflower seed contamination.Juma Mmongoyo, a former MSU food science doctoral student and lead author of the study, analyzed aflatoxin levels of seeds and cakes in seven regions of Tanzania in 2014 and 2015. Nearly 60 percent of seed samples and 80 percent of cake samples were contaminated with aflatoxins.In addition, 14 percent of seeds and 17 percent of cakes were contaminated above 20 parts per billion, the level considered safe by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Some samples had levels of several hundred parts per billion."Billions of people worldwide are exposed to aflatoxin in their diets, particularly in places where food is not monitored regularly for contaminants," said Felicia Wu, the Hannah Distinguished Professor of Food Science and Human Nutrition and Agricultural, Food and Resource Economics at MSU and study co-author. "Our previous work with the World Health Organization on the global burden of foodborne disease showed that aflatoxin is one of the chemical contaminants that causes the greatest disease burden worldwide."To help solve that problem, Wu founded the Center for the Health Impacts of Agriculture. The center tackles global issues, such as antibiotics given to livestock and poultry that seep into soil and nearby bodies of water, and the association between malaria incidence and irrigation patterns in sub-Saharan Africa.
Campylobacter and Salmonella caused the most reported bacterial foodborne illnesses in 2016, according to preliminary data published in CDC’s Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. CDC’s Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network (FoodNet) report provides the most up-to-date information about foodborne illnesses in the United States.FoodNet collects data on 15 percent of the U.S. population. FoodNet sites alone reported 24,029 foodborne infections, 5,512 hospitalizations, and 98 deaths in 2016. The numbers of reported illnesses by germ are: Campylobacter (8,547), Salmonella (8,172), Shigella (2,913), Shiga toxin-producing E. coli (1,845), Cryptosporidium (1,816), Yersinia (302), Vibrio (252), Listeria (127) and Cyclospora (55). This is the first time the report also includes in the total number of infections those foodborne bacterial infections diagnosed only by rapid diagnostic tests in FoodNet sites. Previously, the report counted foodborne bacterial infections confirmed only by traditional culture-based methods in the total numbers.Salmonella Typhimurium infections, often linked to beef and poultry, decreased 18 percent in 2016 compared with the average for 2013-2015. The continuing decreases in Salmonella Typhimurium may be due to regulatory action to reduce Salmonella contamination in poultry and vaccination of chicken flocks by producers. Reported Yersinia, Cryptosporidium, and Shiga toxin-producing E.coli infections increased. These increases are likely due to newly available rapid tests that make infections easier to diagnose, rather than to a true increase in illness.“This report provides important information about which foodborne germs are making people sick in the United States,” said Robert Tauxe, M.D., M.P.H, director of CDC’s Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases. “It also points out changes in the ways clinicians are testing for foodborne illness and gaps in information as a result.”The new data reflect the increasing popularity of rapid tests known as culture-independent diagnostic tests, or CIDTs. These faster tests can have immediate benefits for treatment, but do not collect information needed to determine if an infection is antibiotic-resistant or if it is linked to an outbreak. Positive results on rapid tests can be followed up by culture-based tests to get detailed data, but often are not, according to the report.“We need foodborne-illness trend data to monitor progress toward making our food supply safer,” Tauxe said. “It’s important that laboratories continue to do follow-up cultures on CIDT-positive patients so public health officials can get the information needed to protect people from foodborne illness.”Foodborne illness remains a substantial public health concern in the United States. Previous analyses have indicated that the number of infections far exceeds those diagnosed; CIDTs might be making those infections more visible. However, the shift to CIDTs poses challenges to monitoring foodborne illness trends because changes in the number of new infections could reflect changes in testing practices rather than a true increase in infections. For this reason, comparisons of the 2016 data with data from previous years may not accurately reflect trends. Estimated infections this year and in years past are accurate, but cannot be directly compared because the total now includes results from diagnostic tests. FoodNet is developing new tools that will allow it to continue to track the needed progress toward reducing foodborne illness.FoodNet provides the information needed for effective food-safety policies and prevention efforts. CDC works closely with other federal, state, and local partners and with the food industry to improve food safety in the United States.“We are making progress in detecting and responding more quickly to foodborne illness, but our priority remains preventing illnesses from happening in the first place,” said Susan Mayne, Ph.D., F.A.C.E., director of FDA’s Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition. “The final rules we are implementing under the FDA Food Safety Modernization Act focus on prevention, and we will continue to work closely with other government agencies at the local, state and federal levels, as well as our tribal and territorial partners, to support industry compliance with the new requirements.”In 2016, USDA’s Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) finalized new performance standards for reducing harmful bacteria in chicken parts and ground poultry. FSIS expects these actions could prevent as many as 50,000 illnesses each year caused by Salmonella and Campylobacter in chicken and turkey products.“Our new performance standard for chicken parts is a perfect example of the type of proactive, prevention-based food policies that we’re focused on at FSIS – policies that are based on science, that are supported by strong data, and that will truly improve public health,” said Al Almanza, FSIS Administrator.
Monsanto has completed a $50 million expansion at its Muscatine, Iowa plant. The expansion provides increases the formulations and packaging capacity at the plant to support the launch of Monsanto’s dicamba-tolerant trait technologies.“Iowa is fortunate to have innovative companies like Monsanto that are making significant investments to create jobs in our communities while also providing farmers new tools to help increase productivity and reduce their environmental impact, said Iowa Agriculture Secretary Bill Northey. “The Muscatine plant expansion will help ensure farmers continue to have a variety of tools as they work to increase yields and improve profitability.”Open since 1961, the Muscatine facility employs 400 full-time workers. It produces both selective chemistry products and glyphosate-based herbicide products in Monsanto’s crop protection portfolio including Warrant, Degree, Harness, Roundup WeatherMax and XtendiMax.“For more than 55 years we have been a proud part of this community and today is a celebration of the success and importance of modern agriculture in the great state of Iowa,” said Shawn Schrader, Monsanto Muscatine plant manager. “The work taking place at this site will play an important role in helping farmers produce better harvests and meet the global demand for food – putting Muscatine at the heart of one of the largest agricultural weed management in history.”The dicamba-based Roundup Ready Xtend Crop System is designed to provide farmers with more consistent, flexible control of weeds, especially tough-to-manage and glyphosate-resistant weeds. The Roundup Ready Xtend Crop System has potential for use across more than 200 million acres of soybean and cotton production in the Americas, and possibly corn production.
Colombian-based Daabon Group has been awarded for its pioneering approach to sourcing sustainable palm oil in Latin America by becoming the world’s first oil palm grower to receive certification from industry body – The Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil – that shows the company has exceeded global standards.The issue of sustainable palm oil is becoming increasing significant in world markets as consumers and industry want to work with credible and ethically sourced ingredients. The palm oil industry has more than its fair share of controversies, often associated with deforestation and the subsequent burden on the environment and endangered animal species, but Daabon is one company trailblazing in the sector and really pushing forward with its policies relating to sustainable palm oil practices.And this milestone has been recognized by trade body, RSPO, which awarded Daabon with its NEXT certification, a voluntary add-on module engaging RSPO member companies to exceed the RSPO’s internationally recognized sustainability standard. RSPO NEXT was developed in response to the increased market commitments for no deforestation, no development on peat, no fires, and no human rights violations.A comprehensive audit was carried out at Daabon over six days. Dabbon’s four palm oil estates in Northern Colombia were reviewed as well as 122 smallholder farms who supply the mill.Click to EnlargeDaabon group’s oil palm plantation of around 9,950 hectares, has been certified according to RSPO Principles and Criteria since 2010, producing “Identity Preserved” sustainable palm oil since then. Daabon commenced its additional RSPO NEXT auditing process in January 2017 by third party, independent, certification body, Control Union Certifications.“This achievement reconfirms Daabon’s commitment to sustainability and RSPO. We are especially proud to be the first group globally, together with our 122 small farmers, to show that RSPO NEXT Certification is challenging, but doable, also for smallholders,” says Manuel Julian Dávila, Daabon's CEO.What does being awarded RSPO NEXT mean?RSPO NEXT is a voluntary effort that engages with RSPO member companies that have met the current requirements and guidance of the RSPO Principles and Criteria and in addition, through their voluntary policies and actions have exceeded them. RSPO Next has been designed to allow credible third party verification of those actions. Going beyond policy statements RSPO NEXT provides assurance that only independent, third party and accredited on the ground verification, done in a standardized way, can bring.Click to EnlargeThe components of RSPO NEXT fall into the following categories: No Deforestation, no Fire, no planting on peat, reduction of GHGs, respect for human rights and transparency and are applicable at an organization wide level, including investments, joint ventures and in the organization’s wider supply base.Within each category there are indicators that are audited for compliance by an accredited RSPO Certification Body (CB). RSPO NEXT applies to the practices on the ground not only of the RSPO Certified operations but additionally sets up requirements regarding suppliers of raw material, regardless of the path of delivery of that supply. Guidelines are being developed that stress significant participation in the core RSPO P&C’s across an entire organization with some activities contingent on the requirement of commensurate effort via uptake from supply chain members.Datuk Darrel Webber, CEO of RSPO, congratulated Daabon Group for achieving this milestone.“It is a demonstration of the great momentum we are seeing from RSPO members in the Latin American palm oil market, where output of certified sustainable palm oil is growing.”Supun Nigamuni, Program Manager RSPO at Control Union Certifications, said: “Control Union strive to help our customers demonstrate their sustainability credentials through the quality and integrity of third party certification. We are glad to have had the opportunity to do this at yet a higher level via RSPO NEXT certification.”Last month,FoodIngredientsFirstfeatured adetailed reporton sustainability targets and progress in the palm oil space. You can read ithere!By Gaynor Selby
As a result of globalization, consumers’ social and culinary horizons have broadened considerably over the past years. Increased exposure to new cultures and cuisines has whet consumers’ appetites for novel flavors, textures and food combinations, and this culinary curiosity, in combination with increased awareness and expectations of the healthiness and sourcing of food products, is putting suppliers’ skills to the test.Keeping an eye on the latest consumer demands for exciting and responsible food products, Symrise‘s Flavors business division aims to supply “innovative products that provide the market with new impulses and help the industry to tap into the full potential of its brands and products.” Represented in over 40 countries across the globe, Symrise is placed among the leading companies in the global flavors and fragrances market. At €2,903.2, the flavors and fragrances supplier‘s 2016 sales figures exceeded its target for the fiscal year, with sales in the Flavor segment increasing by 4% to €1,015.9 million from €980.2 million in 2015.Speaking on the topic of savory and ready meals, Simone Ehbrecht, Director Marketing Category Culinary EAME, Symrise Flavors Division, identifies health and naturalness as salient consumer trends driving development in the sector.“Natural is the prerequisite when it comes to food and drinks. People increasingly scrutinize products, demanding natural and sustainably sourced ingredients. Quality and taste perception are directly linked to sourcing and processing,” Ehbrecht says. “Healthy eating has transformed from niche to mainstream and has become a lifestyle subject. Consumers demand healthy and tasty products; healthy food is becoming more creative, pleasurable and delightful. What people (don’t) eat is defining their identity and gives them orientation. Thus, healthy eating becomes more fragmented, and different nutritional niches such as vegan, paleo, keto and Low FODMAP are growing.”Increased Consumer Awareness“Increased awareness of issues such as sustainability is causing consumers to up their demands in terms of food and flavor quality,” Ehbrecht notes. With foodie culture maturing, “expectations towards premium indulgence are rising and quality ingredients become a prerequisite. Creativity paired with craftsmanship does not only mean quality ingredients but also chef-skilled preparation, special serving and packaging.”A love for good food is at the forefront of many consumers’ minds, driving demand for more specific, authentic and natural ingredients, with consumers especially “embracing the variety of new food offerings that promise guilt-free eating and maximum indulgence,” Ehbrecht says.In response to these trends, Symrise is targeting consumers’ different needs by “making products healthier, more natural and sustainable, and at the same time more affordable and impactful,” using leading technologies and capabilities to deliver effective and consumer preferred natural taste solutions and optimizing flavor perception and delivery, Ehbrecht notes.Flavor TrendsIn terms of flavor trends and culinary products, (regional) cuisines, rather than single flavor trends, are gaining favor with consumers.“Those upcoming cuisines are e.g. Portugal, Georgia, Laos, Burma, Malaysia, Taiwan, the Philippines, Indian Thali, Brazilian and Mexican regional (Yucatan). Of course, migration streams bring new impetus that lets people discover unknown cuisines (influences from countries such as Afghanistan, Syria, Nigeria),” Ehbrecht says. “North African and Middle Eastern spices and condiments such as sumac, saffron, harissa, baharat, ras el hanout and Indian rending curry are becoming more and more trendy and finding their way to Europe and the US.”Globalization continues to influence consumer preferences, leading to the remixing and combining of disparate cuisines, techniques and ingredients. New and interesting fusion cuisines include “East Meets East,” e.g. combining Korean and Polish cuisines, and “East Meets West,” e.g. fusing Italian and Chinese cuisines, she adds.Sustainability More AccesibleMeanwhile, consumer expectations regarding the health and sustainability aspects of their meals are increasing and the clean and clear labeling of ready meals and marketing around sourcing and sustainability are becoming a pre-requisite. “Sustainability has long been an abstract concept, hard to grasp and related to special markets in Western Europe. Now, people want to know where their food comes from and how it was made – transparency takes center stage. They also pay more attention to reading food labels.”People are increasingly recognizing the inter-connectedness and limitations of our world, the impact of their consumption behavior on both the planet and their own bodies, and that they can make a difference, Ehbrecht notes.“This is expressed e.g. in the ‘zero food waste’ movement, but also in the more conscious handling of meat consumption,” Ehbrecht says. “‘Free from’ is linked to clear labeling: dairy-free, gluten-free and additive-free, etc. Healthy nutritional styles such as clean eating, vegan, paleo, low FODMAP, low carb/high protein and raw, etc. offer new guidelines and rituals that give people’s lives a sense of direction. The own body is seen as a temple and supermarkets as shrines of ‘clean eating,’ a faith that promises happiness, health and energy.”Suppliers are responding to this demand for healthier, convenient products through, for example, food reformulation. “[Symrise has] more than 10 years of experience in successfully rebalancing the taste profile of e.g. salt reduced products by considering our entire Symlife product portfolio of authentic and consumer preferred taste solutions. Together with our industry partners we make actual products healthier and more natural to meet today's consumer's expectations,” she concludes.By Lucy Gunn
PPG has submitted a third takeover offer for a combination with the Dutch paint and chemicals firm Akzo Nobel N.V. The comprehensive proposal letter, which was provided to Messrs. Antony Burgmans, Chairman of the Supervisory Board and Ton Büchner, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of Management, detailed PPG’s increased price of €96.75 (cum dividend) per outstanding ordinary share of AkzoNobel, comprised of cash of €61.50 and 0.357 shares of PPG common stock. Including the assumption of net debt and minority interests, the proposed transaction is now valued at approximately €26.9 billion, or $28.8 billion.In response, Akzo Nobel N.V. (AkzoNobel) confirmed that it has received a third unsolicited and conditional proposal from PPG for all outstanding share capital of the company. In accordance with its fiduciary duties and acting under the Dutch governance code the Board of Management and Supervisory Board of AkzoNobel will carefully review and consider this proposal.The move turns up the heat on Akzo ahead of its annual meeting today where it will face a group of shareholders unhappy it has not engaged with PPG. Shares in Akzo, the maker of Dulux paint, jumped as much as 6 percent to a record high of 82.95 euros following the improved proposal.Akzo is Europe’s largest coatings supplier and the world’s largest producer of protective and marine coatings. Its portfolio spans basic chemicals such as chlorine all the way through to ingredients for skin cream and paint. In the food ingredients industry, the company has a significant role as a salts supplier.Last month, AkzoNobel had rejected a second unsolicited, non-binding and conditional proposal of 20 March from PPG Industries Inc. for all of the issued and outstanding ordinary shares in the capital of AkzoNobel. The Dutch paint and chemicals firm AkzoNobel said it had rejected a raised 22.37 billion euro ($24.19 billion) takeover proposal from rival PPG Industries, but this third proposal is at least being carefully reviewed.In the letter, PPG Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Michael McGarry said, “We are extending this one last invitation to you and the AkzoNobel boards to reconsider your stance and to engage with us on creating extraordinary value and benefits for all of AkzoNobel’s stakeholders.”“Our revised proposal represents a second increase in price along with significant and highly-specific commitments that we are confident AkzoNobel’s stakeholders will find compelling. We stand ready to work with you expeditiously to complete a targeted due diligence review and to negotiate a definitive agreement for the combination.”Key Details of PPG’s Revised Proposal Include:PPG would acquire all of AkzoNobel’s outstanding ordinary shares (including ordinary shares represented by American depositary shares) at a value of €96.75 (cum dividend), consisting of €61.50 in cash and 0.357 shares of common stock of PPG per outstanding ordinary share (or for each three American depositary shares). The total value of our proposal of €96.75 per share is based on PPG’s closing stock price of $105.94 and the prevailing exchange rate ($1.0726/Euro) on April 21, 2017.PPG’s revised proposal represents:•    An increase of €6.75, or 8%, over our prior proposal on March 22, 2017, and €13.75, or 17%, over our original proposal on March 2, 2017;•    A value for the total outstanding equity of AkzoNobel of approximately €24.6 billion;•    A premium of 50% over the unaffected closing price of AkzoNobel of €64.42 on March 8, 2017;•    A premium of 42% over the unaffected 12-month median broker target price per AkzoNobel share of €68.00; and•    A premium of 24% (cum dividend) over the closing price of AkzoNobel of €78.20 on April 21, 2017, including the impact of AkzoNobel’s new standalone strategy, and 26% over the calculated ex dividend price as adjusted for the payment of the proposed 2016 final dividend and 2017 enhanced regular and special dividends outlined as part of the new standalone plan. (Please refer to Annex B within the revised proposal letter for further illustration of these premiums).PPG believes its revised proposal is vastly superior to AkzoNobel’s new standalone plan, as articulated on April 19, 2017. As evidenced by the decline in AkzoNobel’s stock price since its investor update, the capital markets have not recognized any additional value from its new standalone plan, including the enhanced regular dividend and special dividend that AkzoNobel has proposed for 2017.One of the more notable risks of AkzoNobel’s new standalone plan is that it creates two smaller, unproven standalone companies with uncertain market valuations and substantial risks for reaching its 2020 guidance, especially given many of the annual targets that AkzoNobel has identified have not been achieved previously. AkzoNobel’s standalone plan also will require substantial restructuring; potentially decreases free cash flow, putting future and accelerated growth plans of the demerged companies at risk; and could require a regulatory review that would extend the timeline and create uncertainty.PPG believes the long-term value creation from a combination of the two companies will be significant for shareholders of both companies, including the benefits of annual synergies of at least $750 million, which PPG has estimated based on publicly available information.PPG’s revised proposal offers a value to AkzoNobel’s shareholders that is well in excess of AkzoNobel’s ability or track record to create value on a standalone basis, including via its revised strategy, in the near future as well as in the medium and long term.PPG is prepared to make significant commitments to AkzoNobel’s stakeholders, as set forth in the revised proposal letter, that provide greater value and certainty than AkzoNobel’s new standalone plan.PPG has performed a significant review and analysis of the expected antitrust approval risks and requirements in connection with the proposed transaction, and is confident that all required antitrust approvals can be obtained in a timely manner. In connection with obtaining such approvals, PPG is ready to commit to a mutually agreed level of divestitures as may be reasonably necessary to meet those requirements.To provide further evidence of PPG’s confidence that the required approvals can be obtained, and even in the absence of receiving any information from AkzoNobel or working with AkzoNobel’s antitrust experts, PPG is prepared to commit to a significant reverse break-up fee.PPG repeats its numerous offers to make available its antitrust experts to meet with AkzoNobel’s antitrust experts to share the detailed analysis that PPG has completed.Upon the closing of the proposed transaction, AkzoNobel’s strong ties to the Netherlands, and Europe more broadly, will be maintained, the group stressed.In addition to the commitments set forth in other sections of PPG’s revised proposal letter relating to, among other things, employees, pensioners, research and development, sustainability and community investment, PPG said it would be willing to commit to the following:•    PPG anticipates that AkzoNobel’s current European locations will continue to play an important and meaningful role in the combined company. The combined company’s architectural/decorative coatings and specialty materials businesses would continue to be headquartered in the Netherlands and the marine and protective coatings business would continue to be based in both the U.K. and the Netherlands.•    PPG is prepared to have a dual listing of the combined company’s shares with trading both on the NYSE and Euronext Amsterdam.•    PPG will not relocate any of AkzoNobel’s production facilities in Europe to the U.S.•    Local suppliers to AkzoNobel in the Netherlands and U.K. will be given a full and fair opportunity to sell to the larger, combined new company.
Kraft Food Ingredients has added Heinz Ketchup and Lea & Perrins Worcestershire Sauce along with a variety of Heinz vinegars, relishes and sauces to its broad portfolio of ingredient solutions. These products are now available in several sizes and formats to meet a full range of manufacturing and foodservice needs.Andrew Scribner, VP and General Manager at Kraft Food Ingredients toldFoodIngredientsFirst: “We believe our biggest opportunity for expansion is to apply Kraft Food Ingredients’ existing business model in the bulk ingredients industry to the Heinz portfolio of products. This will allow us to further expand our portfolio of iconic ingredient solutions, providing additional opportunities for our customers to incorporate the quality flavors consumers know and love into a variety of applications.”Click to EnlargeScribner noted that they are currently review cross-branding opportunities on an individual basis to ensure the customer’s product works in unison with The Kraft Heinz Company portfolio of products. “We welcome discussions with our customers on cross-branding opportunities and review each for strategic fit on an individual case-by-case basis,” he added.Scribner confirmed that they are evaluating additional opportunities in regard to international growth and expansion. “We service customers globally and our current portfolio of products is available for international customers.”Kraft Food Ingredients continues to lead the way in delivering quality solutions for the challenges of today’s food manufacturing world. With access to Heinz products, Kraft Food Ingredients' customers explore more possibilities and flavors for their products and applications.Click to Enlarge“We pride ourselves on offering our customers high-quality ingredients that consumers know, love and trust,” stated Andrew Scribner, vice president and general manager of Kraft Food Ingredients. He continued, “For years, we’ve been able to supply the food industry with household names like Kraft Cheese, Grey Poupon Mustard and A1 Steak Sauce, making the addition of Heinz Ketchup and Lea & Perrins Worcestershire Sauce a perfect fit for the Kraft Food Ingredients family of products.”The introduction of America’s Favorite Ketchup to the Kraft Food Ingredients portfolio demonstrates The Kraft Heinz Company’s commitment to the success of its ingredient division and its customers. Along with its portfolio of iconic brands and quality products, Kraft Food Ingredients’ team of experts provides customers innovative applications designed to take advantage of today’s consumer trends.Kraft Food Ingredients is a trusted, customer-driven partner to food manufacturers looking for the finest ingredient solutions, including cheese, dairy, confectionery, condiments and sauces. Headquartered in Glenview, Illinois, and built on a renowned history of success and a foundation of quality, Kraft Food Ingredients is the B-to-B ingredient division of The Kraft Heinz Company – the fifth largest food and beverage company in the world. With the unequaled resources of a global leader, including employees in 40 countries, Kraft Food Ingredients helps customers make an impact in today’s marketplace through proven performance, iconic brand solutions, innovative technologies and world-class service.The Kraft Heinz Company was formed by the merger of Kraft Foods Group and Heinz in 2015.By Robin Wyers
orbionhas reported sales of €229.9 million (US$250.3 million) in the first quarter of 2017, an increase of just 0.7%, with the bakery segment falling short of expectations. And this will impact future financial results for 2017 with the company claiming that the losses in Bakery will dampen growth.While organic sales growth was down 2.3%, mostly due to a volume decrease in food, partly offset by an increase in Biochemicals, EBITDA excluding one-off items increased by 9.4% to €47.8 million (US$520 million).“The start of the year has been encouraging in all segments, except for Bakery, which fell short of our expectations. Profitability exceeded expectations as mix improvements continued to push underlying margins higher. The PLA joint venture with Total became operational in early March,”commented Tjerk de Ruiter, CEO.Corbion’s key financial highlights for the first quarter of 2017 also include an operating result of €41.0 million (US$44.6 million), an organic increase of 28.6%.Biobased IngredientsNet sales in Biobased Ingredients, which encompasses food, biochemicals, and central costs, increased by 1.6%, mostly driven by a positive currency contribution of 3.8%, offset by an organic decrease of 1.5%, according to Corbion.The EBITDA margin excluding one-off items increased from 19.6% to 21.9%, as both the food and biochemicals business segments managed to improve their margins, mostly driven by positive portfolio mix effects and lower input costs.Business segment FoodNet sales for the Business segment Food decreased organically by 3.5% and Corbion says that a “decrease in sales was expected for the first quarter as we lost some volumes in more commoditized parts of the US meat market and optimized the customer and SKU portfolio in Bakery in Q2 2016.”However, the sales reduction was more pronounced than originally anticipated due to losses at frozen dough, and challenges in Corbion executing its Bakery channel strategy.As a result Corbion is speeding up its overhaul of the commercial organization in Bakery and is taking measures to improve customer service levels.Meanwhile in Meat in the US Corbion regained some of the lost volume from last year, but more importantly, it says, the portfolio mix shift towards natural preservation solutions continues to support margin improvements.Meat sales growth outside the US was mainly driven by Latin America. In other markets (Beverages, Confectionery, Dairy), sales increased slightly. The EBITDA margin improved from 20.3% to 22.2% due to mix improvements and lower input costs.And in the Biochemicals segment, net sales increased organically by 5.3%. All markets grew except for a small decrease in animal health. Agrochemicals returned to modest growth after a very difficult 2016.Corbion also points out that From early March when the PLA joint venture with Total became operational, lactide and PLA sales were no longer recorded in Biobased Innovations but rather in the PLA joint venture with Total. The joint venture will continue to seed the market.Looking ahead for the rest of 2017, Corbion expects quarterly sales to improve but stresses the losses in Bakery will dampen growth.“We now expect 2017 net sales growth in Biobased Ingredients to end up below the multi-year guidance bandwidth of 2-4%. Nevertheless, given the positive portfolio mix developments in the first months of the year, we continue to expect our total Corbion EBITDA excluding one-off items for 2017 to be slightly below that of 2016 (€ 170.1 million),” concludes the company in its Q1 report.
As part of an initiative to cut down on the amount of sugary drinks sold at hospital-based franchises, Subway has announced its 12 NHS stores in the UK have met the relevant criteria relating to food and drink sold on NHS premises for 2016/17.Simultaneously the brand has exceeded the forthcoming CQUIN (The Commissioning for Quality and Innovation) target announcement, by only serving no sugar and reduced sugar beverages in these stores.This roll-out exceeds the deadline for voluntary implementation detailed in the 2017/2018 CQUIN targets, as set-out by NHS England.According to the sandwich makers, reaching the targets ahead of time was possible after Subway switched over to a new beverage partner as well as creating a comprehensive program for its franchises to focus on low and no sugar drinks options.By partnering with Britvic and PepsiCo beverage, Subway stores removed high sugar drinks, in favor of no sugar and reduced sugar dispensed or bottled options only.This is part of an inaugural trial that will help determine the shift in customer behavior and sales impact as a result of the no sugar and reduced sugar roll-out.Now only no sugar and reduced sugar dispensed drinks and bottled variants or water is stocked in fridges. On top of that there are no bundle offers available for cookies or crisps and the ‘help yourself impulse buy’ cookies and crisps removed from the till area as well as healthier crisp options including lower fat, Baked, Sunbites and popcorn varieties. And apples are on sale as as an alternative snack option alongside.“This action builds upon the strong healthier-for-you food-on-the-go credentials the brand already has in place. It further demonstrates our commitment to providing a better food environment in hospitals to patients, staff and visitors,” says  Peter Dowding, Country Director for the UK and Ireland.Meanwhile, all Subway stores in the UK feature calorie labeling on menu panels, nutritional posters displayed in-store highlighting calories, fat, saturates, sugars and salt, low fat logo next to low fat subs, the Heart Research UK ‘heart’ logo, which supports a customer’s choice of a Low Fat Sub, and messaging that all Subs can be made into a salad.According to the company, these help to prompt customers to make healthier decisions in choosing those items not high in fat, saturates, sugar and salt.
US Chocolate giant Hershey has pledged that all of its standard and king-size confectionary range will come complete with easy-to-read front-of-pack labels which show the amount of calories by the end of next year. And half of all Hershey standard and king-size confections will be 200 calories or less by 2022, as part of the company’s “smart snacking promise”.The Hershey Company has announced big plans to increase the visibility of nutritional information on its products by promising clear calories information on labels, and is also doing a lot of work in terms of portion controls.According to Hershey’s, it’s building on its strategy to be transparent and provide choice to consumers and says it is the first confectionery and snacking company to make such a commitment for its entire standard- and king-size range of products.Click to EnlargeBy 2022, Hershey will make 50 percent of its total portfolio of individually wrapped standard- and king-size confectionery products with 200 calories or less. In addition, all of Hershey standard- and king-size confectionery products will have easy-to-read front-of-pack calorie labels by the end of 2018.“Consumers are at the heart of all that we do and we have been at the forefront of providing the choice and transparency they want,” said Michele Buck, President and Chief Executive Officer, The Hershey Company.“We aim to delight our consumers and these steps will provide an even wider range of portion options and clear information to help them select treats that fit their lifestyle.”Right now approximately 31 of Hershey standard- and king-size confectionery products are already 200 calories or less and 70 percent of products carry the “Facts Up Front” calorie label.The new commitments will also offer new king-size options designed to make it easier to share or “save a piece for later”.Hershey expects that the 200 calorie commitment will be achieved through a combination of reformulation, innovative new products and adjusting the size of certain items in the portfolio, but stresses that, more than anything else, it will continue to deliver “great-tasting and high-quality products”.What has Hershey already done?For some time now Hershey has been building on its commitments to using simple ingredients and being open about what goes into its products and from where and how ingredients are being sourced.In February 2015, Hershey transitioned to simple ingredients. Products include the iconic Hershey’s Milk Chocolate Bars and Hershey’s Kisses Milk Chocolates to snacks like KRAVE Jerky. By 2020, all everyday Hershey’s brand chocolate confection products will have simple ingredients.In 2015, Hershey led the development and adoption of the innovative SmartLabel platform. This year detailed SmartLabel™ product and ingredient information will be available online for 100 percent of its products, and next year SmartLabel QR codes will be on all packaging linked to detailed product and ingredient information.Most recently, Hershey launched the interactive Sourcemap tool, allowing consumers to trace the origins of key ingredients for Hershey’s Milk Chocolate with Almonds and Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups.In addition, Hershey recently reported it had sourced 60 percent of all the cocoa it purchased globally in 2016 from certified and sustainable sources, enough cocoa to surpass the amount required for the global production of four of its most popular chocolate brands: Hershey’s, Kisses, Kit Kat (US only) and Brookside.The company is on track to achieve its commitment to source 100 percent of all the cocoa it purchases globally from certified and sustainable sources by 2020.By Gaynor Selby
 26 April 2017 – Global nutrition group Glanbia released its first quarter results, with Total Group Revenue increasing 9.6% on a reported basis and 7.7% on a constant currency basis. The company has also signed binding transaction agreements with Glanbia Co-operative Society for the sale of a controlling stake in the Dairy Ireland segment and related associate businesses. Currently, Dairy Ireland is a wholly owned segment of Glanbia and comprises two business units, Glanbia Consumer Foods Ireland and Glanbia Agribusiness.Q1 ResultsThe company’s Q1 revenue increase was driven mainly by improvements in dairy markets compared to the previous year, as well as an increased contribution from its acquisitions.“Glanbia delivered good revenue growth in the first three months of 2017. Glanbia Nutritionals had a good performance and was the main driver of growth. Glanbia Performance Nutrition delivered in line with expectations, as a strong performance in non US markets countered some challenges in the US market,” says Siobhán Talbot, Group Managing Director.Glanbia Performance Nutrition revenues decreased marginally by 0.2%, as a 0.3% increase in pricing and 2.6% growth from the acquisition of Amazing Grass was offset by a 3.1% volume decrease. Glanbia Nutritionals, meanwhile, delivered a good performance in the first three months of 2017 with revenue growth of 10.3%, driven by a price increase of 7.6%, mainly as a result of improved dairy markets, versus prior year and volume growth of 2.7%, primarily driven by Nutritional Solutions.The full year 2017 outlook for Glanbia Nutritionals is good, the company reported, with revenue and EBITA growth “expected to be driven by the continued growth of Nutritional Solutions and improved dairy markets.”Commenting on the company as a whole, Talbot says, “the outlook for the remainder of 2017 is positive and we reiterate our full year guidance of 7% to 10% growth in adjusted earnings per share, constant currency, from the continuing Group (pro-forma) with growth weighted to the second half of the year.”Dairy Ireland DealSubject to certain approvals and conditions, Glanbia Co-op is to acquire a 60% interest in Dairy Ireland for €112 million, together with an amount equal to 100% of the amount of the working capital in Dairy Ireland at Completion, a company release states.If approved by shareholders, Glanbia expects the deal to be completed by July. After completion of the proposed transaction, Glanbia’s Dairy Ireland consumer foods and agribusiness units are to be established as a separate company called Glanbia Ireland.“I’m pleased to announce that Glanbia has signed binding legal agreements, subject to certain approvals and conditions, to sell a 60% interest in Dairy Ireland to Glanbia Co-op. This strategic initiative remains on track to be completed by mid-year. Once completed it is planned to integrate Dairy Ireland with our Associate, Glanbia Ingredients Ireland DAC to form ‘Glanbia Ireland,’ which will be a leading Irish food business. This will bring together Glanbia Group’s Irish dairy and agri-businesses under single ownership and will enable Glanbia to continue to focus on its two growth platforms of Glanbia Performance Nutrition and Glanbia Nutritionals,” Talbot says.Glanbia’s Board has stated that the proposed transaction is in the best interests of Shareholders as a whole as “it will allow Glanbia to continue to focus on its global nutrition strategy through the platforms of Glanbia Performance Nutrition (GPN), Glanbia Nutritionals (GN) and Strategic Joint Ventures for the benefit of all shareholders; and creates an integrated Irish-based business of scale which is the largest dairy processor in Ireland,” among other reasons.By Lucy Gunn
Denmark-based biotechnology company Novozymes has reported overall positive Q1 results with a 3% organic sales growth mainly driven by food & beverages and bioenergy. The company reports that sales and earnings are on track with this “good start to 2017” which has also seen solid progress on Novozymes strategic priorities.EBIT grew by 6%, and the EBIT margin improved by 0.7 percentage points to 27%. Adjusting for the extraordinary costs related to the layoffs in January, the EBIT margin would have been around 29%. The outlook for 2017 is maintained, the company says.In January, when Novozymes released its financial group statement for 2016 results, the Danish producer of enzymes also announced it was axing 198 employees, 62 of them in Denmark.Novozymes says that as part of the organizational changes, resources are being focused on high-growth opportunities and growth markets, and the company has continued its significant investments in R&D and technology leadership.It has also made good progress in its innovation pipeline with the launch of two new solutions in Bioenergy and BioAg. Furthermore, last month Novozymes embarked on a new strategic collaboration with Boehringer Ingelheim in probiotics for poultry hatcheries.“It’s been a good start to the year. The majority of our markets have developed well, and profitability was high. I’m pleased to see that we’re making progress on our strategic priorities, exemplified by the recent collaboration with Boehringer Ingelheim in probiotics for poultry hatcheries,” says Peder Holk Nielsen, President & CEO of Novozymes.“Finally, our pipeline of new innovation is advancing. All in all: positive developments in Q1.”Food & Beverages sales grew by 6% organically and by 8% in DKK compared with the same period last year. Food & Beverages growth came from most of the company’s segments, with starch, nutrition and brewing contributing most. As expected, sales to Novozymes baking business declined due to the implementation of reduced prices in the North American fresh-keeping market.Sales growth in starch came from several markets. China contributed the most to growth due to a combination of corn price developments and increased demand for our recently launched innovation.Total costs excluding net financials, share of losses in associates and tax were DKK 2.743 million, an increase of 3% or DKK 75 million compared with the first quarter of 2016.Gross profit increased by 4%, and the gross margin was 57.8% in the first quarter of 2017, slightly up compared with last year where the gross margin was 57.6%. Productivity improvements had a positive impact on the gross margin but were offset by unfavorable price/mix changes.Operating costs were DKK 1,164 million, an increase of DKK 26 million, mainly driven by higher sales and distribution costs. Operating costs as a percentage of sales were 31%, 1 percentage point lower than the first quarter of 2016.Sales and distribution costs increased by 6%, representing 12% of sales, while R&D costs were on par with last year, representing 13% of sales. Administrative costs increased by 1%, representing 6% of sales and other operating income totaled DKK 13 million in the first quarter of 2017, compared with DKK 9 million in the same period last year.Nutrition also showed good uptake, mainly in the developed markets, where Novozymes recent launch in low-lactose dairy, Saphera, has been well received. “Lastly, our products within raw material optimization for brewing continued to show good momentum,” the company claims.Net profit was DKK 772 million, an increase of 4% from DKK 745 million in the first quarter of 2016, driven by higher EBIT and a lower tax rate, but partly offset by higher net financial costs.In terms of sales outlook, three months into the year and Novozymes continues to expect to deliver organic sales growth of 2-5% in 2017, with all five sales areas contributing. The outlook for sales growth in Danish kroner remains unchanged at 3-6%.Food & Beverages sales growth is expected to be driven primarily by new products launched in the starch industry in 2016 and 2017. Growth is expected to be higher in emerging markets. Baking is still expected to be negatively impacted by implementation of reduced prices in the North American fresh keeping market.
Duas Rodas, a key international company in the manufacture of aromas and ingredients for the food and beverage industries is set to inaugurate new facilities for its factory in Chile. The investment of more than US$7 million is part of the strategy of consolidation and expansion of the Brazilian multinational in the Latin American market.With about 4,500m2 of constructed area on an 11,000m2 plot in the Lampa commune in Santiago, the new facilities will more than double the production capacity of Duas Rodas at the Chilean facility."The new plant represents the consolidation of our position in the Chilean market, within the framework of Duas Rodas’ vigorous growth plan in Latin America. It is a strategic plant, prepared to act in the strengthening of other global markets. Adequate to meet the demands of the market, is a factory model within the Duas Rodas group," says the president of Duas Rodas, Leonardo Fausto Zipf.The new facilities include an administrative-financial and R&D building and another building for the factory unit, designed and built within concepts that meet the requirements of the international food safety certification FSSC 22000.The unit produces liquid aromas, powdered aromas, seasonings, additives and mixes for the meat industry, fillings, coatings, stabilizers, emulsifiers, dye mixes and ice cream products.In addition to the buildings, the investment also features automated machines and equipment and more modern machines with greater productivity.The new facilities were specially designed to house a line free of allergens, from the storage of raw material to the production and storage of the final product.“In addition to a modern infrastructure, Duas Rodas offers a wide and varied portfolio of items developed to meet the needs and aspirations of the global consumer, while taking into account the cultural and regional aspects of the local consumer," says International Business Director Rosemeri FrancenerPresent in more than 30 countries, Duas Rodas has been acting for more than 91 years in the manufacture of ingredients for the food and beverage industries in Brazil and in the world. With more than 10,000 clients, the company has a portfolio of about 3 thousand items, divided into three major markets: Flavors, with aromas, natural extracts, dehydrated, seasonings and additives and integrated solutions; Food Service, with products of ice cream, chocolates, confectionery and baking; And Animal Nutrition, with ingredients of animal nutrition.Duas Rodas was founded by German immigrants in Santa Catarina, where its headquarters is located. The company has three other factories in Brazil (São Paulo, Sergipe and Manaus) and four in Latin America (Argentina, Chile, Colombia and Mexico), as well as seven research and development centers and an Innovation Center.
At yesterday’s Advanced Process Modelling Forum Process Systems Enterprise (PSE), the Advanced Process Modelling company, and NIZO, the world’s leading food & nutrition contract research organization, announced the formation of the Center of Excellence (CoE) for Food Product and Process Modelling.The CoE will provide a single point service that combines mechanistic product and process modelling tools with industry-leading food characterization techniques and semi-industrial scale pilot facilities, by integrating NIZO’s expertise, pilot facilities and experience in food characterization and modelling with PSE’s gPROMS modelling platform and unit operation model libraries.The integrated software and services solutions will result in better designed and operated processes with less variability, leading to better product quality, lower energy use and hence CO2 footprint, and more flexibility when dealing with varying raw ingredients. Over and above the manufacturing benefits, the ability to combine models and experimental data to provide accurate prediction enables food & beverage organizations to explore the formulation and manufacturing decision space rapidly and effectively to accelerate design decisions.Products modelling suite for optimising the formulation and manufacture of formulated products, including food and pharmaceuticals, using high-fidelity process and material models of unit operations such as crystallization and spray drying combined with product performance models. PSE pioneered the Systems-based Pharmaceutics approach increasingly being adopted by major pharmaceutical companies and now being applied to food & nutrition.NIZO, originally formed by the Dutch dairy industry but now a private and independent company, develops processes and products for food and health companies worldwide. By applying science and technology expertise in proteins, bacteria and processing at laboratory scale and in its food grade processing center in Ede, the Netherlands, NIZO’s research helps customers create competitive advantage through development of novel products and production processes.Marc Goemans CCO at NIZO, says “we are very excited about the Center of Excellence. It offers a unique capability and allows us to provide to our customers the most advanced set of modelling tools and services for food product and process design and upscaling, based on true understanding of the underlying food science. NIZO looks forward to working with PSE to bring this capability to the market”.Sean Bermingham, VP for PSE’s Formulated Products business unit, says “the combination of mechanistic models and experimental data is a powerful approach that helps food companies to accelerate getting the right food products to market in the most cost-effective and sustainable way. We very much look forward to working with NIZO to provide a holistic service that covers all these aspects”
Nestlé UK is informing employees of proposals to make some changes to the factory operations within its UK confectionery business. These proposals span four different sites: York, Fawdon, Halifax and Girvan and may result in a reduction of 298 roles, predominantly at York and Fawdon, through 2017 and 2018. The company expects that these would be achieved through voluntary redundancies.The proposed changes include amended and standardised shift patterns at each factory and, at Fawdon, the most complex of Nestlé’s UK confectionery sites, the transfer of Blue Riband production to a Nestlé factory in Poland. This would mean being able to simplify and focus Fawdon’s operation.The change will end 81 years of British production of the wafer snack, which was originally manufactured in Scotland but is now made in Nestlé’s Fawdon plant in Newcastle.In a statement, the company reported that: “These proposals are being made by Nestlé UK to ensure that these sites operate more efficiently and remain competitive in a rapidly changing external environment.”“A 45 day consultation on these proposals will commence as soon as possible with trade unions and employee representatives. Nestlé UK appreciates that this is an uncertain time for employees and will work hard to ensure all are supported through this difficult period,” the statement concluded.The GMB and Unite unions have said that the proposed cuts were savage and unacceptable, and urged the government to intervene.
Dr Pepper Snapple Group has reported first quarter net income of US$177 million compared against US$182 million over the same period last year. The company reports Earnings per Share (EPS) of $0.96 for the quarter, which included a $0.10 per diluted share gain on the market value increase on the company's initial equity investment in Bai Brands and a $0.10 per diluted share tax benefit associated with a favorable accounting change related to stock compensation.According to the company, core EPS were $1.01 for the quarter, up 7%, inclusive of the two aforementioned items.Last November, Dr Pepper Snapple agreed to buy Bai Brands for US$1.7 billion in an acquisition that closed at the end of January this year."Our teams executed on our strategy of unlocking growth across our priority brands through integrated communication and execution in the quarter. We outperformed the CSD category and grew both dollar and volume share in IRi measured markets,” says DPS President and CEO Larry Young.“We closed on our acquisition of Bai at the end of January and have been providing them with the resources they need to continue to drive strong growth on the brand.”“Our allied brand strategy continues to be a solid contributor to growth and our continued development of Rapid Continuous Improvement is making us better every day."Sales volumes increased 1% for Q1 including the Bai deal, while the addition of Bai sales to third party distributors added 0.2% to sales volume growth, according to the results.Reported net sales increased 2%, including the Bai acquisition, which accounted for about 1 percentage point of the net sales growth. Meanwhile, organic net sales growth was driven by just over one-and-a-half percentage points of favorable mix and price, and an increase in organic volume. Net sales was reduced by over 1 percentage point of unfavorable foreign currency translation and unfavorable segment mix, combined.Gross profit increased $18 million in the quarter on a favorable $15 million comparison of unrealized commodity mark-to-market gains and $7 million of incremental gross profit from the Bai acquisition, which included the effects of deferring the recognition of $9 million of gross profit on shipments of Bai product still in our inventory at the end of the quarter. Gross profit was also impacted by favorable commodity costs and flow-through from organic net sales growth. Gross profit was reduced by increases in manufacturing costs, in part driven by higher utility costs in Mexico, and unfavorable foreign currency translation and transaction, combined.For the quarter, BCS volume increased 1%, with carbonated soft drinks (CSDs) increasing 1% and non-carbonated beverages (NCBs) decreasing 2%. Volume was flat in the US and Canada while it increased 3% in Mexico and the Caribbean.In CSDs, Dr Pepper increased 1%, Canada Dry grew by 5% and Schweppes grew by 8%. Peñafiel increased 5%, and Squirt grew 1%.The company says that these increases were partially offset by declines in root beer brand A&W and 7UP, which both decreased 2%, as slight growth in 7UP in the US was more than offset by declines in the Caribbean. Other CSDs declined 1% and Fountain foodservice volume increased 4% in the quarter.Meanwhile there were also declines in non-carbonated beverages with Snapple declining 6% and Mott's declined 2% as growth in sauce was more than offset by declines in juice.Bai increased 80% on the acquisition and continued growth in our existing distribution, which increased 26% in the quarter. Clamato, made of reconstituted tomato juice concentrate, flavored with spices and clam broth, was flat in the quarter and other NCBs declined 9%, led by Hawaiian Punch.Net sales increased 2% in the quarter driven by concentrate price increases taken at the beginning of the year and a 2% increase in concentrate shipments. This was partially offset by higher discounts due to timing, primarily related to DPS fountain foodservice business. SOP declined 1% on a planned increase in marketing investments of $7 million, which was partially offset by contributions from net sales growth.Net sales increased 2% on favorable product and package mix, mostly due to continued strong growth in the allied brands and growth from the Bai acquisition.However this was also partially offset by a decline in organic volume. SOP decreased 19% as results for the two months of the acquired Bai business, excluding the distribution profits within the group’s distribution system, was a loss of $17 million, including $11 million of marketing investments. This was principally the Bai Super Bowl commercial, and the effects of deferring the recognition of $9 million of gross profit on shipments of Bai product still in the company’s inventory at the end of the quarter.Net sales increased 6% in the quarter on a 3% increase in sales volumes and favorable pricing. SOP declined 20% in the quarter as the segment incurred $3 million of higher US dollar denominated input costs, which caused a 20% decline in SOP. SOP was further reduced by increases in manufacturing costs, in part driven by higher utility costs in Mexico, as well as by increases in certain other operating expenses. Collectively these increases more than offset the contributions from net sales growth and a favorable comparison to a $4 million arbitration award that was recorded in the prior year.DPS says its 2017 full year guidance includes an organic volume growth now expected to be just over 1%; total volume growth is expected to be approximately 2%, inclusive of the Bai acquisition.Net sales growth is now expected to be about 4%, including approximately 1 percentage point of negative foreign currency.
UK MPs have approved the Finance Bill, which incorporates legislation enabling the introduction of the Soft Drinks Industry Levy in April 2018.Malcolm Clark, the coordinator of the Children’s Food Campaign which led the calls for a sugary drinks tax in the UK, said: “This is a good day for parents, health professionals and indeed Parliament.”“A sugary drinks tax has been a hard-fought victory for children’s health. But the next Government should be under no illusion about the scale of the challenge remaining,” he stated.“The battle-lines of opposition have already been drawn by the food and drinks industries and their well-funded front-groups to other similarly brave and bold measures – including restrictions on junk food marketing and promotions – that are needed to reduce childhood obesity and diet-related ill-health.”The Obesity Health Alliance, a coalition of over 40 health charities, medical royal colleges and campaign groups also welcomed the news, commenting: “This is a landmark day for children’s health.”“Reducing our children’s sugar intake is a vital step to tackling devastating high levels of obesity, and can’t happen soon enough.”“We applaud Parliament for showing their commitment to reducing children’s sugar consumption and encourage all parties ahead of the general election to commit to tackling childhood obesity and upholding the implementation and robust evaluation of the levy.”The news was not welcomed by Gavin Partington BSDA Director General, who said: “We have always objected to the soft drinks tax on principle.”“We support the need to address the public health challenge the country faces, but there is no evidence taxing a single product or ingredient has reduced levels of obesity anywhere in the world”He argued, “Soft drinks companies have led the way on reformulation, smaller pack sizes and investment in promotion of low and no-calorie products, which have all helped consumers reduce sugar intake from soft drinks, down nearly 18% since 2012.”“In 2015 the soft drinks sector set a 20% calorie reduction target for 2020 and we are well on the way to exceeding that.”As per the new legislation, from April 2018, drinks with 5g of sugar per 100ml will face a lower rate of tax, while those with more than 8g per 100ml will face a higher rate.
Dean Foods has announced that its iconic Mayfield Creamery ice cream brand is expanding further across the southern U.S. to a collection of new markets in Texas, Oklahoma, Arizona and New Mexico. Mayfield Ice Cream debuted in 1923, and can currently be found in grocery stores across the southeast in Tennessee, Georgia, Alabama, North Carolina, South Carolina, Florida, Virginia, Mississippi, West Virginia, Kentucky and Louisiana.In conjunction with the brand's expansion across the south, the company also announced a brand restage initiative that takes Mayfield back to its roots, including restoring the name of the 94-year-old brand to Mayfield Creamery, the original trademark. To bring this update to life, Mayfield Creamery has completely overhauled its packaging graphics to showcase the brand's core values, reflected in classic iconography and its heritage as a family dairy. The new packaging prominently features a classic Mayfield delivery truck set against the foothills of the Smoky Mountains highlighting the brand's authentic southern roots. The new Mayfield Creamery logo has been adapted from the iconic circular Mayfield Dairy Farms logo recognized by generations of loyal fans."In celebration of the brand's new look and classic name, we're launching a 360-marketing campaign that honors Mayfield Creamery's enduring values," said Mark Schneider, Ice Cream Marketing Director for Dean Foods. "Mayfield Creamery celebrates timeless traditions large and small, and we're proud to focus on the brand's storied heritage, unique signature flavors, and multi-generational commitment to producing the finest quality ice cream using fresh cream from our own dairy, with no artificial growth hormones."In May, Mayfield will return to the airwaves across multiple markets with a new TV commercial featuring Scottie Mayfield, a third-generation Mayfield family member who started working at the creamery when he was only 11 years old and has served as a brand spokesperson for decades. In addition to the TV campaign, the relaunch also includes digital advertising, social media and a mobile sampling tour. In Atlanta, Mayfield has renewed its longstanding partnership as the official ice cream of the Atlanta Braves as they move into their new home at SunTrust Park. In its new Texas market, Mayfield Creamery will be partnering with MiLB's Frisco RoughRiders as official ice cream and exclusive ice cream provider at Dr. Pepper Stadium. The brand also boasts a new Mayfield Creamery website and social media channels.Mayfield Creamery ice cream can be found in the freezer aisle at grocery stores across southern United States.
Sealed Air’s BL75 fully-automated, high-speed bag loader has been available for several years in Europe, but is now available in the US to help cheese processors improve operational efficiency by reducing the need for intensive manual labor.Since its introduction to the North American market 12 to 15 months ago, three BL75 units are currently in operation and another three to six will be coming online by the end of the year, John Kelly, North American marketing director for Sealed Air Dairy Packaging, said.According to Kelly, much of the positive feedback Sealed Air has received around the BL75 is based on its ability to cut down on labor costs and its operational flexibility.“It’s very flexible from machine change tooling to swapping various product sizes,” Kelly told DairyReporter.“I think what’s generated a lot of excitement is that the fact that this ties in very nicely with our current infrastructure,” he said.  “You think about our rotary chamber machines typically in place already, so it’s a really plug-and-play solution for a number of customers.”It is also a simple bolt-on solution to setups not necessarily using Sealed Air equipment, Kelly added.“A lot of the research we’ve done, we found that consumers in a lot of cases are dissatisfied with the ease of opening,” Kelly said.Sealed Air’s Grip & Tear packaging addresses end users’ needs for easy-to-open cheese packaging. Grp & Tear packaging was originally developed and commercialized for the poultry and cured meats categories, and has more recently been used in the dairy industry.“The primary benefit is food safety, whether it’s process customers or end users that we talk to,” Kelly said.“This package can eliminate the need to use knives or other sharp implements to open packages.”The two main product areas that Sealed Air has seen success for Grip & Tear are for larger pieces of cheese such as five to 10 lb cheese loaves behind deli counters or for consumer-facing cheese blocks and wedges ranging from six ounces to two lbs, Kelly said.  
NIZO, the Dutch food and nutrition contract research organization, and Process Systems Enterprise (PSE), a UK advanced process modelling company, have announced the formation of the Centre of Excellence (CoE) for food product and process modeling.The announcement was made at the Advanced Process Modelling Forum in London, UK, this week.The CoE will provide a single point service that combines mechanistic product and process modeling tools with food characterization techniques and semi-industrial scale pilot facilities.This will be achieved by integrating NIZO’s pilot facilities and experience in food characterization and modeling with PSE’s gPROMS modeling platform and unit operation model libraries.The companies said the integrated software and services solutions will result in better designed and operated processes with less variability, leading to better product quality, lower energy use – and hence CO2 footprint – and more flexibility when dealing with varying raw ingredients.Marc Goemans CCO at NIZO, said the new CoE allows the company to provide its customers with an advanced set of modeling tools and services for food product and process design and upscaling, based on true understanding of the underlying food science.Sean Bermingham, VP for PSE’s formulated products business unit, said the combination of mechanistic models and experimental data is a powerful approach that helps food companies to accelerate getting the right food products to market in the most cost-effective and sustainable way.  
LTD Baltic Dairy Board, based in Latvia, has issued its financial results for the year ending December 31, 2016.The figures show a net turnover of €18.6m ($20.3m), a 105% increase on 2015. However, while gross profit was €1m ($1.09m), there was a net loss after tax of €373,000 ($407,000).The company attributed this to the first four months of production at the company’s new added-value product factory in Bauska, Latvia.The factory is one of the largest milk protein and whey protein facilities in northern Europe, with approximately 8,000MT of protein powder produced every year.Baltic Dairy Board said starting milk processing in the Latvian market as a new market player required the purchase of additional ingredients at the early stage, and the company had to pay a higher price for milk than other processors paid on average.The company added the lower processing capacity is, the higher expenses for each processed ton are. It said every month, with the amount of milk increasing, the expenses for each processed ton have decreased significantly.The family-owned company, which was founded in 2008, said its main goal is to establish its own drying facility by 2018, with the capability to dry its own liquids and offer drying services to other dairy companies.Products currently made by the company include skimmed milk, pasteurized cream, milk protein concentrate (MPC), milk permeate and skimmed milk concentrate. 
Agropur Ingredients has developed a process of isolating a form of glycomacropeptide (GMP), a substance that may have positive implications for people diagnosed with phenylketonuria (PKU), from whey after cheesemaking.PKU is a birth defect that inhibits the body from digesting the amino acid phenylalanine. “GMP is a peptide originally part of the casing molecule and during the cheesemaking process it gets released and it ends as a small piece in whey protein and it becomes soluble,” Anand Rao, vice president of research and development for Agropur Ingredients, told DairyReporter.“GMP, unlike other protein molecules, is devoid of three amino acids especially phenylalanine.”The result is a light-colored, mild-tasting, free-flowing powder that can be used in functional foods and beverages, and dietary supplements.Agropur’s GMP received the Breakthrough Award for Dairy Ingredient Innovation at American Dairy Products Institute's (ADPI) annual meeting in Chicago.For a person with normal metabolism, phenylalanine is an essential amino acid that can be easily digested and metabolized, according to Rao.However, for someone with PKU, which affects one in every 10,000-20,000 births, dietary phenylalanine cannot be metabolized in a normal fashion because of a missing enzyme. If someone with PKU does ingest phenylalanine it can become neurotoxic and potentially fatal, Rao explained.“What that means for a child is basically malnutrition, because all proteins have phenylalanine except GMP,” Rao said.Until GMP, there was no other alternative protein for those with PKU; the only ingredient that existed was a co-mingled amino-acid blend, according to Rao.“Now they have an alternative and that’s the reason we need to get it to the highest purity that we can,” he said.There are also additional health benefits of GMP including remineralization for use in dental hygiene products like toothpaste and mouthwash.“It can put calcium back on to your tooth enamel,” Rao said. “There is also some evidence that suggests GMP can help put calcium back on bones to help treat osteoporosis.”There is also a possibility that GMP could also have antiviral properties according to some studies, Rao added."To our knowledge, only one other dairy ingredient company manufactures a whey protein concentrate with 60% GMP," Rao said. "GMP extends our protein's reach to pharmaceutical applications." 
EBRD (the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development) and Esas Holding venture capital firm have acquired a majority stake in Korozo Ambalaj, in Turkey.The company which has nine plants across Turkey makes flexible packaging for ice cream, confectionery, snacks, chips, bread and coffee, among others and was founded in Istanbul in 1973 by brothers Liya and Refael Duvenyaz.Jean Marc Peterschmitt, MD, Industry, Commerce and Agribusiness, EBRD, said Korozo has grown to become a major manufacturer of flexible packaging in Europe and the largest in Turkey.More than half of Korozo’s production is exported to 80 countries worldwide and it plans to expand the company into more international markets.“Korozo is a great example of an ambitious Turkish firm which has started as a family business and grown into a truly international player,” he said.“We are proud to become shareholders and support the company in its next phase of development as it seeks to become one of Europe’s leading producers of flexible packaging.”The company is currently building a state-of-the-art facility in Çorlu, Tekirdağ province, in the northern Marmara region, to expand production and boost exports.Jeki Mizrahi, CEO, Korozo, said the partnership is a big step forward that will accelerate Korozo’s growth and investments.“We will continue to contribute to the Turkish economy, drive market growth and add value for all our business partners,” he added.EBRD’s equity investment comes with a $1m loan provided by the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) to help the company minimise waste and become more environmentally friendly.It is part of EBRD’s Near-Zone Waste program in Turkey which, with support from the CTF and EU. 
DemoDAIRY at Terang, in southwest Victoria, Australia, is starting the process of winding up the cooperative after it says all options to remain open have been exhausted.However, the co-operative said it hopes to leave a legacy for the area’s dairy industry by directing remaining funds into ongoing support to regional dairy education, extension and promotion activities.The DemoDAIRY Board voted to start the winding-up process, which is now subject to shareholder approval, and meeting regulatory requirements may take several months.Chairman Ian Teese said the decision to close the co-operative was disappointing but unavoidable.Over the past 18 months, there have been consultations with shareholders and industry stakeholders on the future of the DemoDAIRY facilities and dairy farm.  The board concluded DemoDAIRY is no longer a high priority for regional dairy industry organizations and dairy farmers, and operating profitably had become challenging.DemoDAIRY was established 20 years ago as an applied research and demonstration farm, but its role in the dairy industry has changed in recent years as on-farm research projects were phased down, and demonstration activities were largely replaced by focus farms.Teese said DemoDAIRY had been unable to find a long-term anchor tenant for the dairy precinct, vacated about three years ago by WestVic Dairy, to support the National Centre for Dairy Education as a precinct tenant.“A major anchor tenant is essential to the visibility and viability of the precinct and to contribute to the ongoing building maintenance costs,” Teese said.“We canvassed both within the industry at farmer and organizational level and potential external users but discussions with large industry organisations have been exhausted without a positive outcome.”The National Centre for Dairy Education will be able to continue use of part of the facility under its current lease arrangements.“We are seeking legal advice regarding what is required by the Registrar of Cooperatives and the formal legislative requirements that are needed to close a cooperative,” Teese said.“We are timing the decisions based on critical dates for the farming in the area and to maximize the value of land and buildings.” 
Almost two thirds of nutrition companies are implementing new forms of technology, with around half increasing their R&D spend this year, according to a survey by the organizers of the upcoming Vitafoods Europe event.Vitafoods Europe exhibitors and visitors were asked about six new forms of technology.Around a third (32%) of the 192 respondents said their companies have implemented, or are planning to implement, new product testing technologies. Nearly a quarter (23%) are introducing smart packaging.  One in five (21%) is exploring new tracing technologies such as QR codes on packaging while 17% have created or will create smartphone apps.Less common forms of technology being used include 3D printing (6%) and geolocation technology (2%).  Only 36% said they were not using any of the technologies on the list.  Almost half the companies surveyed plan to increase their R&D spend, while 47% said they were planning to spend more on research and development projects this year than last year. Only 6% said their companies would spend less. Commenting on the findings, Chris Lee, managing director, Global Health and Nutrition Network, Europe, Informa Exhibitions, which stages the event, said new technology is revolutionizing the way nutrition companies do business.“Innovation has always been at the heart of Vitafoods Europe, and this year visitors will have more opportunity than ever to learn about new products, new technologies, and new ways of working,” Lee said.Lee told DairyReporter this will be be the 21st Vitafoods Europe. “At the first one, 20 years ago, there were 100 exhibitors, and just over 1,000 visitors. This year we’re expecting around 18,500 visitors from 115 different countries.“I think it’s fair to say the stature of the event has grown too.  We’re pretty  firmly established as the place to be for anyone who wants to do business, source new ingredients and products, learn and network in the global nutraceutical industry.”Lee said the philosophy surrounding the event remains different to others.“We see ourselves as a key stakeholder in the nutraceutical industry - our mission is always to help build it in partnership with like-minded people,” Lee said. “We’re also different in that we work year-round so we’re not just a one-off event.  And in recent years we’ve become part of a much bigger group that brings together a portfolio of events and media including SupplySide West, Expo West, Natural Products Expo, Engredea and Supplyside East as well as Vitafoods Europe and Vitafoods Asia.”Lee said the event tries to ensure there is something to meet everyone’s objectives, from ingredient to shelf.“So we divide content into four key areas of the industry: Ingredients and Raw Materials; Contract Manufacturing and Private Label; Services and Equipment and Branded Finished Products.“There will be 120 new offerings launched over the past year in our New Products Zone, and 66 in the New Ingredients Zone.”As far as the dairy industry is concerned, Lee said there’s plenty of representation.“Over 100 exhibitors will be offering ingredients for dairy,” he said.“Meanwhile, the Omega-3 Resource Centre will offer expert information on fortifying dairy products with Omega-3s.  We’re also the best place to understand more about consumer trends, get advice on regulation and meet providers of specialist services and technologies.”Vitafoods Europe takes place May 9-11 at Palexpo, Geneva, Switzerland.DairyReporter will be in attendance at the event. Companies wishing to meet and discuss their new products can contact us here . 
Soylent is voluntarily recalling 890 boxes of its Soylent 1.8 powder because it may contain undeclared milk, says the company, which had hoped to stay out of the spotlight after a rocky few months marred by recalls of version 1.6 of its powdered beverage and food bar and a public squabble with a supplier.In a statement  on its website, the L.A.-based meal-replacement brand explained: “It has recently come to our attention that a small amount of whey powder may have been incorporated into one production lot of Soylent 1.8 powder during manufacturing at our third party facility."It added: “This voluntary recall is immediately being initiated after it was discovered that the milk-containing product was handled adjacent to the production lines for Soylent 1.8 powder. Subsequent investigation indicated that the potential cross-contact was caused by a temporary breakdown in our 3rd party manufacturer’s production and packaging processes.“As a precautionary measure we have halted shipments of Soylent 1.8 powder (SKU: 1WK-V108) with Lot #: G7076PA, Expiration / Best Buy date: 02/2018.  “We have started shipping newer lots to customers and do not anticipate an interruption in supply at this time… No illnesses have been reported to date in connection with this issue, and this will not impact future shipments of Powder 1.8.”Soylent powder v1.8 was launched in late March after Soylent made more changes to its formulation (version 1.7 was rushed out pretty rapidly in late December 2016 following the high-profile recall  of v1.6 in the fall of 2016 amid reports of digestive discomfort).Soylent initially suspected whole algal flour was to blame for the problems with v1.6 – a contention hotly disputed by algae ingredients supplier TerraVia  – and quickly reformulated the powder to remove it in v1.7.Just a month later, however, it tweaked the recipe again  (v1.8), this time replacing isomaltooligosaccharide or ‘IMO' with soluble corn fiber – which it claimed “provided a truer source of fiber to the consumer” - and replacing high oleic algal oil with high oleic canola oil.The marks the third time the young brand has recalled its products.The first recall came in 2015 after it detected a manufacturing glitch which caused mold  to grow on the exterior of some bottles of its flagship rady-to-drink product, Soylent 2.0. A probe at the manufacturing facility of its co-packer revealed that guardrail settings on a conveyor were not optimized, causing some bottles to move erratically, resulting in small splashes on the external surface of the bottle. 
Grupo LALA posted $789m in net sales for the first quarter of 2017, an 18.3% increase compared to the same period last year, which the dairy company credits to a product mix that continues to evolve towards a value-added portfolio.“The highlight of the first quarter of 2017 for Grupo LALA was the acceleration of organic sales, which contributed to a total sales increase of 18% versus the first quarter last year,” Grupo Lala CEO, Scot Rank, said.The company’s “Other Dairy Products” category, which includes yogurt, cream, cheese and desserts, grew by 38.6% to nearly $260m in Q1 2017. The milk category also experienced positive gains increasing 11.4% to $478m, up from $430m in Q1 2016 and now accounts for 61.3% of total sales.The growth of the milk category “was fueled by an overall good performance in our portfolio and in particular, by the introduction of LALA 100 in Mexico,” the company said.Operating income decreased 19.5% to $70m, compared to the first quarter of 2016, this contraction was attributed to an increase in operating expenses, due to the integration of business in Central America and the US.Grupo LALA started its US business after acquiring Laguna Dairy, announced in May 2016 , for $246m, which included three production plants and more than five brands.In Q1 2017, net sales of LALA US were driven by the expansion of the company’s drinkable yogurt business and the performance of Borden Dairy’s drinkable yogurt products under the LALA brand in July 2016.The overall yogurt drinks category grew 62% in the past five years, reaching $893m in 2016.“Yogurt drinks are becoming increasingly popular among US consumers, and as adoption of the yogurt drinks segment grows, so too does innovation,” Beth Bloom, senior analyst, US Food & Drink at Mintel, said.  
Scientists at AMBER (Advanced Materials and Bio-Engineering Research) at Trinity College Dublin have created printed transistors from 2-dimensional nanomaterials for the first time. The ‘nanocomputers’ could unlock the potential for smart food labels such as packaging that displays a digital countdown to warn people when their milk is about to go off, or wine labels that alert consumers when their white wine is at its optimum temperature, or a window pane that shows the day’s forecast.Dr Jonathan Coleman, head researcher on the project said printable electronics have been developed over the last 30 years based mainly on printable carbon-based molecules but while these molecules can be turned into printable inks, the materials are unstable and have performance limitations. “In the future, printed devices will be incorporated into even the most mundane objects such as labels, posters and packaging. Printed electronic circuitry (constructed from the devices we have created) will allow consumer products to gather, process, display and transmit information: for example, milk cartons could send messages to your phone warning that the milk is about to go out-of-date,” he said. The circuits could set a precedent for more flexible and cheaper electronics made from materials such as graphene, phosphorene and molybdenite, and the team believe there is a wide scope to improve performance beyond the current printed transistors.The findings from AMBER have been published in the journal Science . “We believe 2D nanomaterials can compete with materials currently used for printed electronics. Compared to other materials employed in this field, our 2D nanomaterials have the capability to yield more cost effective and higher performance printed devices. However, while the last decade has underlined the potential of 2D materials for a range of electronic applications, only the first steps have been taken to demonstrate their worth in printed electronics,” added Coleman.“We felt it was critically important to focus on printing transistors as they are the electric switches at the heart of modern computing. We believe this work opens the way to print a whole host of devices solely from 2D nanosheets.”The research was carried out in collaboration with the groups of Professor Georg Duesberg (AMBER) and Professor Laurens Siebbeles (TU Delft, Netherlands).The team used standard printing techniques to combine graphene nanosheets as the electrodes with two other nanomaterials - tungsten diselenide and boron nitride - as the channel and separator (two important parts of a transistor) to form an all-printed, all-nanosheet, working transistor.The ability to print 2D nanomaterials is based on Dr Coleman’s scalable method of producing 2D nanomaterials, including graphene, boron nitride, and tungsten diselenide nanosheets, in liquids - a method he has licensed to Samsung and Thomas Swan. These nanosheets are flat nanoparticles that are a few nanometres thick but hundreds of nanometres wide.Nanosheets made from different materials have electronic properties that can be conducting, insulating or semiconducting and so include all the building blocks of electronics.Liquid processing is advantageous in that it yields large quantities of high quality 2D materials in a form that is easy to process into inks.Dr Coleman is a partner in Graphene flagship, a €1bn ($1.09bn) EU initiative to boost new technologies and innovation during the next 10 years. 
A new experimental dairy farm has been opened in Spain.The Monells Cattle Farm (EVAM) at IRTA is located in Monells (Girona).  IRTA is a research institute owned by the Government of Catalonia.EVAM is intended to be a tool to serve the interests of industry and the Catalan region, and be a platform for research, experimentation and transfer.The farm combines knowledge of climatology, agronomy, plant production, water and excrement management, animal handling, genetic and reproductive improvement, and animal well-being and health, to improve competitiveness and sustainability throughout the milk industry.EVAM's aim is for the milk industry to benefit from the application of new tools for genetic improvements and health, new food models and the handling of animals, and to improve productive efficiency and reduce environmental impact.It will also work with industry to develop new technologies to help create and market dairy products.The project has involved an investment of €2.4m ($2.6m) in buildings and equipment, to which the Provincial Council of Girona, the regional ERDF, the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness and IRTA have contributed equally.The farm currently has 60 cows, but it will expand to up to 120.EVAM is based on a concept of comprehensive research, as it seeks to integrate all the elements that influence milk production, from fodder production to the management of excrement, to informing consumers and the general public.1. Research directed at generating new knowledge, to help solve technological and innovation challenges in the industry.2. Transfer of results, to contribute to improving industry competitiveness, seeking to increase production efficiency, health and well-being of the animals, as well as in the quality and differential and added value of dairy products and derivatives.3.  Informing the public about the production process of milk and its treatment up to its consumption, by implementing proactive informative and promotional actions.The services of EVAM are expected to help the dairy industry in several ways.The goal is to evaluate, test and apply new tools, strategies, techniques and products, to improve the efficiency and sustainability of farms.EVAM will also publicize new improvements in field management, the handling of animals and their excrement, and the latest technologies applied to obtaining dairy products.It will also be a meeting point for dialog with different stakeholders, to promote research, development and transfer projects from the farmer to the consumer.The farm is expected to be a facility where new farmers and entrepreneurs in the dairy industry are trained in the technical aspects of agricultural production and the dairy production process.EVAM will also interact with the public to explain elements of milk production. 
Demand for cheese is up nearly 3% according to Nielsen data (ending 52 weeks Mar. 25, 2017), a slight drop from 2016 levels of 3.3% demand, but a minimal decrease in demand should not be overlooked, according to Blimling & Associates director, Phil Plourd.Blimling & Associates, a dairy market intelligence firm based in Madison, Wisconsin, analyzes the trends impacting dairy market pricing.“Cheese consumption crested early in 2016 and has been sliding ever since,” Plourd said at the ADPI/ABI 2017 Conference in Chicago this week.“From a cheese perspective, demand has been a little less robust than it was not so long ago and a little bit of change in that regard is a big deal.”Every 1% in domestic cheese demand translates into roughly 2m lbs of extra cheese per week, Plourd said.“It helps explain why cheese prices have slid back to $1.50 (per lb) compared to $1.70 at the start of the year,” Plourd added.The same story can be told for domestic butter demand, which has flattened since being up in demand by 4.7% in 2016, according to Nielsen.However, the plateau in domestic butter does not necessarily mean less is being sold in retail stores, Plourd explained - pipeline issues and the timing of holidays such as Easter could skew the data.“But when you look at that trend, it looks like it peaked in early 2016,” he said. “Every 1% of butter demand equals about 8 truckloads per week of product.”However, Blimling & Associates’ outlook for the dairy market remains mostly positive.“We’re still not in the danger zone on big picture numbers,” Plourd said.Blimling & Associates does believe that US President Donald Trump’s stance on trade with Mexico will end with a mutual resolution between the two countries.“I think the Mexican market is way too important for the US beyond dairy,” Plourd said.“Despite current appearances, we expect the US to reach some sort of peaceful accommodation on trade with Mexico.” 
Consumer understanding of the nutritional benefits of protein is soaring in Asia, according to research from NZMP, the ingredients brand of New Zealand-based dairy manufacturer Fonterra.NZMP conducted comparative surveys in five markets, namely Indonesia, China, Japan, UK and US.“We wanted to understand how we can operate in this highly fragmenting market that protein is going to,” said Roshena de Leon, global insights manager for NZMP.De Leon presented key findings of NZMP’s research at the recent Protein Now industry event, which the company held in Singapore.Of the five markets surveyed, Indonesia registered the highest protein awareness level at 91%, followed by the UK at 87%, Japan at 85%, the US at 84% and China at 75%.De Leon attributed Indonesia’s high protein awareness to the government’s nutrition programmes, which highlight protein’s importance for health.She pointed out that 47% of respondents there understood protein’s importance in maintaining body wellness.In China on the other hand, she said while protein was regarded as a positive, alongside vitamins and minerals, survey participants presented fragmented views on how it benefitted overall health.For example, 20% said protein gave energy and stamina to the body, while 14% said protein was good for maintaining body wellness. Other protein perceptions included making bodies stronger 13%, good nutrients (11%) and boosting the immune system (9%).In Japan, the UK and the US, protein is strongly linked to sports nutrition, and consumers there perceived it as a crucial nutrient for strengthening muscles, she added.Lastly, the study found that most consumers from all five markets believed that the best protein source come from animals – whether as meat, dairy or eggs.“The robustness of animal protein attracts consumers,” said de Leon. The texture and taste of animal protein was preferred as well, she added.Asian demand for protein productstoo is projected to increase by 11% to 2021, de Leon said. 
Viking Icelandic Yogurt – which hit the market in 2015 as grass-fed products started to gain traction in the dairy case - is launching nationally with Sprouts starting April 17, says brand owner Saga Dairy, which has also won listings in conventional accounts including HEB Central Market, and ShopRite.   “Our high protein, grass-fed yogurt at an affordable price really resonated with the buyer, as well as our commitment to health and wellness community initiatives,” said Therese Meers, an attorney who specialized in providing legal assistance to small businesses before co-founding Saga Dairy  in 2015 with her husband Phil, who has a background in corporate restructuring.She added: “Viking is a national brand in nearly 1,000 stores from California to the Carolinas, as far north as Michigan and Wisconsin and as far south as Texas and Florida.”The Meers - who don’t hail from Iceland - are taking a novel approach to marketing their high-protein ‘skyr-style’ yogurts, by going back in time to present yogurt as the fuel that powered the Vikings on their epic voyages across the Atlantic, and inviting fans to ‘Unleash your inner Viking’.The packaging - which playfully describes the product as “America’s first yogurt!” – adds: “The Viking Sagas tell the story of how they first brought Viking yogurt to America… 1,000 years later, it finally returns…”However, the fact that Saga Dairy (which is based out of Boston and Chicago and manufactures its products in upstate New York) is a family-run business producing a high-quality product is more important to retail buyers and consumers than whether the founders are Icelandic, Therese Meers told FoodNavigator-USA after the launch. “People really like the fact that we’re a family owned business and they want to support what we’re trying to do, which is make high protein, lower sugar yogurt more accessible, something you can eat daily, not a treat [each 6oz pot has 16-19g protein and 5-14g sugar; the pure variety has 5g sugar – all from the milk - and 19 g protein].“But they also really like the taste and the texture. We spent a long time working with experts at the University of Illinois to understand the cultures to use and get the recipe exactly right.”The flavors include Pure, Vanilla, Coconut Creme (with coconut ream and shredded coconut), Strawberry, Blueberry, and Cucumber Mint.  Saga Dairy founders Phil and Therese MeersWe don’t need to add as much sugarMeers added: “Because we’re taking out more of the whey [Viking Icelandic Yogurt is strained for longer than Greek yogurt, so requires four cups of milk to make one cup of yogurt vs three for Greek yogurt, she says], we don’t need to add as much sugar.”As for the flavors, while cucumber mint might sound a little off the wall, it’s one of the things that impressed buyers about the brand, which is “bringing something new and unique” to the category, she added.Consumers also like the fact that Viking comes in 6oz cups (many other players in the category have reduced their cup sizes to 5.3oz), but still retails at a lower price ($1.59 or $1.25 on sale), she said. “Not everyone can afford to spend $2-3 on a cup of yogurt. We want to bring Icelandic yogurt to the mainstream, to make it something you can afford to eat every day.”Read more about Saga Dairy HERE.  
Global Dairy Trade (GDT) has announced that Singapore-based milk powder blending manufacturer, Asian Blending, is now offering chocolate and vanilla flavored milk powders on GDT Marketplace.Alan Kent, commercial director SIS and Asian Blending Industrial at Asian Blending, said the company is a long-standing buyer on GDT Marketplace, and now is moving to be a seller as well.“The growth of GDT Marketplace is an exciting development for the dairy industry,” Kent said.“While traditional dairy products such as milk powders, fats and proteins are well established on GDT’s platforms, we are excited to be introducing a new wave of product types. “Our initial product offering will include flavored milk powders with a view to introduce nutritional milk powders and instant coffee mixes in the future.”Asian Blending manufactures food ingredient blends, specializing in the beverage, dairy and confectionery sectors.Eric Hansen, director of GDT, said Asian Blending’s products show the variety of dairy ingredients it is possible to sell on the platform.“We’re pleased to see a non-traditional dairy company using GDT Marketplace, and providing another supply region for buyers of speciality dairy ingredients. “Buyers want more product choice from different regions throughout the world,” Hansen said.Asian Blending commenced sales on GDT Marketplace this month, with a total of five sellers now registered to list products on the platform. 
Dairy showed the largest six-year shipment value increase compared to any other food and beverage segment, according to PMMI’s 2017 Trends in Food Processing Operations report.Shipment value increased 42.8% over six years to $116.3bn, representing 15.9% of the total $731bn food and beverage industry.While volume sales of milk have been slowly declining, the growth of cheese and yogurt products have helped the industry gain back some of those losses, PMMI found.Simultaneously, manufacturers have been able to pass the rising price of milk used in those products on to the consumer.“The consumption of fluid milk has been slowly decreasing, however the industry has been able to innovate, to recreate, and to find different niches successfully,” Jorge Izquierdo, vice president of global marketing at PMMI, told DairyReporter.The growth of other dairy categories is being driven by convenience and nutrition with products such as yogurt, dairy drinks, and cheese snacks performing particularly well, PMMI said.“Ten years ago the yogurt market was quite small here in the US, but in the past five years innovation in that space has exploded,” Izquierdo said.Marketing dairy snack towards kids is one area that has gained a lot of attention, Izqueirdo pointed out, as the snack market continues to move beyond carbohydrate-heavy snacks like chips and granola bars to more dairy products.“Marketing towards kids is expanding beyond snack foods and cereals to more sophisticated foods containing legumes and dairy products as a dessert or snack,” the report stated.Following this particular trend, Sargento recently launched its Sweet Balanced Breaks Snacks, which combines savory cheese flavors with other ingredients such as dark chocolate, dried fruit, and nuts.  “Success is coming up with the next big snack for time-impaired consumers looking for healthier and flavorful options,” one process engineer of snack foods told PMMI in its report.According to PMMI, 63% of companies in the food and beverage industry are actively exploring new processing technologies and the dairy industry also registered the largest increase of capital expenditure on processing equipment and a decline of 7.8% in leased machinery.One particular processing technology that has gained traction among dairy processors and manufacturers is HPP (high pressure processing), Izquerido said.He explained that HPP is a way to satisfy the consumer who wants high nutritional value, a long shelf life, without any preservatives or additives in a dairy product.“HPP, a technology that’s been around for 20 years, but wasn’t necessarily accessible because it requires a significant investment by the manufacturer,” Izquerido said. 
After having required clean label, consumers are now concerned about manufacturing processes, says Claranor. The company, which designs and supplies packaging sterilization systems for beverage and dairy industries based on Pulsed Light Technology, says people want to be reassured about the origin, the way of producing and environmental footprint of their goods.This is for packaging but also in terms of formulation, they are looking for more ‘naturality’, said Isabelle de Forsanz, market manager, Claranor.“Consequently, products are not anymore self-stable, the filling process requires increased hygienic measures like packaging sterilization,” she said. “Whereas the industry is cost driven it is a real challenge to produce without preservative and with more natural ingredients while keeping a process without chemical disinfection means.“To achieve their new goals the industrialists introduce major changes and best practices in their way of producing. Greener processes which require less or no chemicals, less energy, no water are becoming the rule, or at least the target.”Claranor, based in Avignon, France, designs and manufactures pulsed light units for inline packaging sterilization, using no chemical disinfectants nor water.Its systems are aimed at manufacturers of sensitive food products, particularly beverages and dairy products.De Forsanz added Interpack, in Dusseldorf, Germany, (May 4-10) is a major tradeshow and 2017 will be the fourth time it has participated in the event. Its portfolio includes Claranor Essential, a compact and cost-attractive cap sterilization designed for low and medium speed lines; Full cap sterilization, to address cross-contamination issues for ESL products (> 60 days) and the Puls’Combi FS, which is a combined decontamination of cups and lids. “On Claranor’s booth, visitors will have the opportunity to see two cup sterilizers already sold to dairies in France (4 lanes) and in Turkey (12 lanes), to be installed on Doselec filling lines,” said de Forsanz.“The compactness of our unit makes it easy to integrate on existing line. Using no water and no chemicals, our decontamination systems meet industrial expectations in terms of germicidal effects without the drawbacks of chemicals and irradiation technologies.”Food and beverage manufacturers and OEM’s can discuss their packaging sterilization projects with the Claranor team and Löhrke, its exclusive distributor in Germany.  
Palcut, which works with Kellogg’s, Mondelēz and Arla Foods cutting custom-sized paper from rolls for palletization, has launched a Point-of-Sale (POS) concept; the Antim intermediate sheet.The Antim intermediate sheet has side flaps that hang over the goods on a pallet, which can be used for promotional material, and according to Rudi Pedersen, MD, Palcut "ensures visibility at a time when more retail chains are limiting in-store promotion". Palcut is exhibiting the product at Interpack in Dusseldorf, Germany, this year (May 4-10) among others and plans to relaunch its corporate identity with a new logo, graphic identity and stand design. “Interpack is our opportunity to show both new and existing customers our new products as well as collecting market response on product ideas. We are testing a new Antim Stacker concept, which produces intermediate sheets internally,” said Lars Østergaard Jonasen, product manager, Palcut. “We see two major trends in the market today. The environmental impact of packaging material consumption which should be reduced (the EU’s directive on waste management, CSR policies amongst big retailers etc.). Our experience tells us that retail suppliers can achieve significant reductions in the use of packaging, if only they choose the right materials for palletising. “Also, there is a high demand of automatically packaging lines all the way through to the palletization and storage. To meet those changes in the market we will continue to customize automated interlayer dispensers and continue to develop interlayer products.”Other products on display at the tradeshow include Palcut sheet cutter, Antim non-slip paper, Palcut Stacker and Palcut Smoother. The Palcut Stacker is a module that connects to a Palcut sheet dispenser. The stacker consists of a lifting system, which places the cut sheets on a pallet for use elsewhere in the business.    “Many of our customers have packaging lines where they pack by hand. Here they need a technology for producing intermediate sheets internally,” added Jonasen. “With a Palcut Stacker installation, they can cut sheets for the other packaging lines. The advantage is flexibility, reduced storage requirements and less capital tied up in stock.”  The Palcut Smoother removes tension from sheets with a heavy paper quality, 250 grams/m2 and above. This means the cut sheets lie flat and ready on the packing robot’s collection table so all paper on the roll can be used. This reduces the number of roll changes and interruptions to operation. 
Danone has published its first quarter results, and forecast improvements due to completion of the WhiteWave acquisition.Danone and WhiteWave will combine activities for North America to operate as a new strategic business unit, DanoneWave.Danone said DanoneWave is scaled to accelerate Danone’s growth journey towards 2020 and is specifically designed to immediately set the operational business back in motion after the impact of a lengthy process of closing, while preserving WhiteWave’s “entrepreneurial spirit and its innovation capacity.”Danone said the transaction will improve Danone’s full year like-for-like sales growth profile by an extra 0.5% to 1%.For 2017, Danone has upgraded from “solid” to “strong” the expected recurring EPS accretion from the WhiteWave acquisition.Geographically, sales declined by 4.3% in Europe, but rose by 12.3% in the CIS and North America.The fresh dairy products division reported sales down 2.3% like-for-like, including a 5.3% decline in volume and a 3.0% rise in value.In Europe, Danone said sales were impacted by difficult market conditions and Activia’s performance.Within the CIS and North America region, Danone said it generated stable growth.In Russia, Danone said the enhancement of its brand portfolio’s value through rising prices and positive mix management continued to offset a decline in volumes in lower-end segments.The ALMA (Asia-Pacific, Latin America, Middle East and Africa) region reported a slightly negative performance, as consumption trends in Brazil worsened.Early Life Nutrition sales rose 4.1% like-for-like, including a 0.1% rise in volume and a 4.0% increase in value.Danone attributed the performance to gains in developing a direct distribution model in China, where “direct” sales showed double-digit growth, supported by a growing presence in specialized stores and direct e-commerce, and the recent launch of Aptamil Platinum.It also announced it anticipates a steep rise in milk prices over the year, with variations from one geographical area to the next: a low to mid-single digit increase in Europe and the US; and a strong rise in emerging countries such as the CIS and Latin America. 
A Melbourne food packaging start-up has been acquired by RPC for an undisclosed sum—the latest purchase by the global plastics player in a frenzied buying spree.Amber Plastics was founded in 2012 by entrepreneur Malcolm Prior, who has spent about 50 years in the packaging business. He will remain chief executive for at least the next two years under British-based RPC’s ownership.His first business, Priority Plastics, was the first to manufacture in-mould labelling and blow-moulding in Australia when it launched in 1976. After selling that he launched Baroda Manufacturing to supply pails, lids and cartridges for the food service, oil, and grease industries, which he sold in 2006, though he remained at the company.Amber, a leading supplier of injection-moulded plastic packaging containers to the dairy and food industry, will now become part of RPC’s Superfos division, and will supply both the food and non-food markets.Amber is the second big purchase by RPC since February, when it made a bid for Letica’s 13 American plants in a deal valued at US$640m. That was the sixth acquisition in as many months as it sets out to grow expansively beyond its European redoubt.Prior confirmed to Plastics News that the Amber purchase had gone through, and that he would stay at the company he founded.“I’ve got rid of the risk, but can keep working,” he told the industry news service. “I have no plans to retire. There’s no need; I enjoy what I do.”He said he had set out to sell the business and chose RPC from a short-list of three suitors due to the company’s commitment to retain Amber’s 40 employees. 
Amidst the uncertainty surrounding the future of NAFTA with US President Donald Trump pledging to get rid of the trade partnership, Mexico has been looking to diversify its trading partners.Professor of agricultural economics at Cornell University’s Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management, Andrew M. Novaković, PhD, told DairyReporter Mexico looking beyond the US for trade partners is not a surprising move.“The part that is scary about Mexico is with all of this economic plus immigration rhetoric, Mexico is exploring alternative suppliers across the board and dairy is an important one for us,” Novaković said.Since NAFTA became law in 1994, US dairy exports to Mexico have more than quadrupled to $1.2bn, making Mexico the US dairy industry's No. 1 export market, accounting for nearly one-fourth of all US dairy exports last year, according to USDEC.“A lot of people will tell you that Mexico is already looking to diversify their sources of supply even though nothing has changed yet because they’re so worried about the rhetoric and they don’t want to find themselves caught short,” he said.“In some ways that damage has already started to occur.” Last month, US dairy leaders traveled to Mexico City  to reaffirm the value they see in maintaining Mexico as a trade partner, while advising Mexico to be cautious in pursuing new trade deals with other nations."I believe Mexico needs to be smart about opening its market to other dairy suppliers that are more interested in spot sales than a long-term partnership," USDEC president and CEO, Tom Vilsack, told Mexican dairy leaders attending the National Dairy Forum in Mexico City.Argentina reportedly next trade partnerHowever, Mexico has moved toward finalizing a trade deal with Argentina by the end of the year, Mexico’s deputy minister of foreign trade, Juan Carlos Baker, said during an interview with Reuters.Argentina’s President Mauricio Macri also promised to open the Latin American country’s economy and trade to Mexico by the end of 2017.  "The potential is there," Baker said. "The Argentine exporters could find attractive conditions in Mexico."Baker told Reuters Mexico would not go back to paying an export tax if exports to the US became restricted.  
Ornua Foods North America has filed a trademark lawsuit against Old World Creamery and its newly-formed brand, Eurogold, in Wisconsin for naming its new butter product “Irishgold” because Ornua says it is substantially similar to its Kerrygold Irish butter trademark. “Defendants could have chosen any name for their new product. Instead, they intentionally chose a name and packaging confusingly similar to the Kerrygold mark in order to take advantage of the publicity surrounding the current unavailability of Kerrygold Irish butter in Wisconsin,” plaintiff Ornua wrote in the court document.Ornua told DairyReporter “as legal proceedings are still ongoing we cannot comment further at this time” and that the company looks “forward to a resolution of this matter.”Old World Creamery and Eurogold have not responded to DairyReporter’s request for comment.According to the court document filed in the Eastern District Court of Wisconsin, Ornua stated: “Consumers wanting to purchase Irish butter will likely be misled into thinking that defendants’ Irishgold Irish butter is the work-around for selling Kerrygold Irish butter in Wisconsin, and will purchase Defendants’ product thinking it is Kerrygold Irish butter.”Kerrygold Irish butter was pulled from all Wisconsin retailers earlier this year because of a law that requires state regulators to approve the food safety of butter products made outside the US.Since Kerrygold is already graded, packaged, and produced in Ireland, Wisconsin retailers are banned from selling the butter.Kerrygold had been selling its butter in the US for more than 15 years prior to the enforcement of the protectionist law in Wisconsin.Ornua attempted to solve the issue by working with the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture to help continue the sale of Kerrygold in the state. To meet Wisconsin’s requirements, Ornua agreed to have its butter processed, packaged, and graded a second time at a facility in Wisconsin, specifically Weyauwega Cheese.After meeting with the owner of Weyauwega Cheese, Stephen Knaus, Ornua said it shared product specifications and grading procedures in order to begin the packaging and grading of Kerrygold Irish butter at the Wisconsin facility.During the discussion, Ornua said it proposed to Weyauwega Cheese to sell Kerrygold in packs of two four-ounce sticks – packaging that Ornua has used successfully in other US markets. Ornua also shipped 40,000 pounds of Kerrygold Irish butter to Weyauwega, from which it said Weyauwega processed 417 cases of finished product.Eurogold was formed on March 8, 2017, while Ornua said it was was continuing negotiations with Knaus, and on March 14, 2017, Eurogold filed a federal trademark application for “Irishgold.”Irishgold butter can now be purchased throughout the state of Wisconsin and Illinois.“The likelihood of confusion is also not accidental,” Ornua stated in the court document. “Mr. Knaus cut off discussions and decided to sell butter using Eurogold’s obviously derivative Irishgold mark, using packaging substantially similar to packaging for Kerrygold Irish butter.” Ornua Foods North America and Ornua Co-Operative Limited v. Eurogold USA LLC and Old World Creamery LLC, Case No: 2:17-cv-00510, US District Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin 
Ametek has agreed to acquire Mocon for $182m, with the deal expected to close in Q2, 2017.  Mocon, based in Minneapolis, US, sells laboratory equipment to research laboratories, production facilities and quality control departments in the food and beverage industry among others.DairyReporter reported last year  Mocon had launched a yeast and mold test method for dairy applications called the GreenLight detection platform, which reduces testing times by up to 80% compared to agar plate methods, enabling dairies to release product in 18 hours.  The test method boosts capabilities in total viable count (TVC) and “indicator organisms” for bacteria, using its oxygen-depletion sensor and automated reader.Yeast and mold is common in yogurts, due to contamination of fruits that add flavor, or due to packaging deficiencies, but less common in liquid milk. In January, Mocon launched OX-TRAN 2/12 oxygen permeation instrument for brand owners, film manufacturers and converters who either use or sell flexible materials for produce applications.“Unlike many other food products, which require higher barrier films to extend shelf life, produce has a much shorter shelf life and it requires higher transmitter materials that can breathe to prevent premature spoilage,” said Ryan Holland, product manager, permeation, Mocon, at the time. “Not having a good handle on your material transmission rates can result in shelf life of a couple of days vs. a couple of weeks that is necessary for the packer-to-consumer lifecycle. For example, a film batch that is off by 10% could have a devastating impact on an already narrow shelf life window.”Speaking of the merger with Ametek, Robert Demorest, CEO, Mocon, said the transaction will provide long-term benefits for its customers and employees."By joining a larger global enterprise, Mocon will have the resources to expand its gas analysis products and technologies,” he said. Mocon reported sales of approximately $63m for the calendar year ending December 31, 2016."MOCON is an excellent company that has tremendous synergy with Ametek," said David Zapico, CEO, Ametek. "They are the global leader in gas analysis instrumentation for package and permeation testing. Its products and technologies complement our existing gas analysis instrumentation business and provides us with opportunities to expand into the growing food and pharmaceutical package testing market." Pennsylvania, US, based Ametek manufactures electronic instruments and electro-mechanical devices with annual sales of approximately $4bn. Its corporate growth plan is based on operational excellence, strategic acquisitions, global and market expansion and new products.  
Unilever published its first quarter financial results this week, with ice cream doing well as the company reports solid growth.Turnover increased 6.1% to €13.3bn ($14.3bn), and underlying sales growth was 2.9% with price up 3.0% and volume down 0.1%.The ’refreshment’ category, which includes ice cream, grew by 5% compared to the previous first quarter.Growth in ice cream was helped by strong innovations behind premium brands. These included the new Magnum pints, as well as the coconut and raspberry variants.Ben & Jerry’s grew at double-digit rates, helped by strong performances of the ‘Wich sandwich and the new pint range ‘Topped’.  Unilever has also extended its less than 50 calories offering under Solero and launched vegan and gluten-free variants under Cornetto.CEO Paul Polman said the first quarter shows growth reflecting continued investment in both innovations and brand support, and reconfirms the strength of the company’s long-term sustainable compounding growth model.“The change programme ‘Connected for Growth’, which we started implementing in the autumn last year, is clearly bearing fruit and is making Unilever more agile and closer to the local markets, unlocking both further growth and margin,” Polman said.He added Unilever is on track for another year of underlying sales growth, in the 3–5% range.Unilever said in the markets in which it operates, growth was around 2% with negative volumes.Markets in Europe and North America declined in the first quarter, while Brazil continued to be adversely impacted by the economic crisis.As part of Unilever’s strategic review, it announced April 6, 2017 the decision to either sell or demerge its spreads business.Ewa Hudson, head of health and wellness at Euromonitor International said despite economic uncertainty in emerging markets, those markets still offer the largest opportunity for growth for Unilever.“In these markets, consumers’ nutritional awareness is growing,” Hudson said, adding disposable incomes are also on the rise.“Ageing populations and rising obesity rates are fuelling this,” she said.She noted while Latin America has increased its share of company health and wellness sales, there is still more work needed in other emerging markets, particularly Asia Pacific.“Unilever’s food and beverage operations are relatively reliant on mature markets, in particular Western Europe. The company is investing in diversifying away from these markets, but there are still opportunities to expand its coverage. “Unilever should look to continue expanding its brand portfolio in emerging markets, particularly Latin America, where it has a growing presence and consumer following, and Asia Pacific.” Hudson said Latin America has also seen growth in sales of health and wellness food, and with a rising overweight population in the region, the company should build on its success and raise consumer awareness of healthier product options to support its weight management brands.  
The falling demand for fizzy drinks has hit Coca-Cola as the soft drinks giant posts its first quarter results and also announces 1,200 job losses. As global consumers continue to opt out of sugar sweetened soda in favor of healthier choices and a general change in tastes and preferences continues to sweep across many food and drinks sectors, growth is stalling at Coca Cola.In an announcement yesterday (Apr 26), Coca Cola said its global carbonated drink sales fell 1% in the quarter to 31 March, while non-carbonated drinks are driving sales in North America.The job cuts will start to happen in the second half of this year and into 2018.Coca Cola’s position reflects what is happening generally in the soft drinks industry as it comes to terms with slower growth which can then lead onto cost cutting exercises – just like announcing job losses.Coca Cola is increasing its cost-cutting target by US$800m in annualized savings, and expects to save US$3.8bn by 2019.However, company chairman and chief executive Muhtar Kent – who makes way for James Quincey next week – insists that the Q1 performance is what was expected."The first quarter performance was in line with our plan, and we remain on track to deliver our underlying revenue and profit targets for the full year. As anticipated, revenues in the quarter were adversely impacted by two fewer days and the shift of the Easter holiday,” he says.“Most importantly, we continue to execute against the long-term strategic transformation plan for the Company – a plan that I am confident will deliver even greater shareowner and stakeholder value in the years to come.""Next week I will proudly hand over the CEO reins to James Quincey with full confidence that he will complete the Company's transformation and lead our aggressive growth agenda. His vision of accelerating The Coca-Cola Company's evolution into a total beverage business with a focus on driving sustainable growth across a broad portfolio is exciting for all stakeholders, and he has my full support," Kent continued.President and Chief Operating Officer James Quincey said how Coca Cola is evolving to make changes that will result in a more “consumer-centric” portfolio that keeps pace with changing taste and preferences which primarily means cutting out or reducing sugar.“Importantly, these portfolio changes will help our consumers moderate the amount of added sugar they consume. In addition, as we approach the end of our refranchising and implement our new, more agile operating model, we are expanding our productivity program.”“Our revamped portfolio, a stronger global bottling system, and a leaner enterprise structure will allow us to capture an increasing share of the vibrant value growth available in the beverage industry and to deliver value for our shareowners.”“It will be an honor and a privilege to lead the organization as CEO, and I look forward to working with our people around the world to accelerate our growth."Other key results for the first quarter include Coca Cola’s net revenues declining 11%, reflecting unfavorable impacts from structural changes of 10% and foreign currency of 1%, while organic revenues (Non-GAAP) were even, which included the impact of two fewer days in the reporting calendar and the shift of the Easter holiday.Meanwhile, price/mix grew 3% with balanced contribution across the operating segments and the operating margin and comparable currency neutral operating margin (Non-GAAP) expanded more than 90 basis points and more than 220 basis points respectively.Coca Cola also reported EPS of US$0.27 and Comparable EPS (Non-GAAP) of $0.43 and says it is on track to deliver full year organic revenue (Non-GAAP) and comparable EPS (Non-GAAP) targets.
The market for milk ingredients will continue its volume growth. A better balance between supply and demand over the last year has improved prices, despite the build-up of EU intervention stocks in 2016. Milk supply reductions will help the market and provide the stimuli for future volume and value growth. This is according to a new report on milk ingredients from 3A Business Consulting, entitled “The World Market for Milk Ingredients 2016-2020.”The world market for milk ingredients continues to grow by 3% annually in volume terms, whereas the value has changed significantly given the price volatility over the period 2014-2017. However, the prices of the higher added-value milk ingredients, e.g. milk protein isolates and milk protein hydrolysates, have not shown the same volatility as the commodities whole milk powder and skim milk powder. Currently, it is estimated that the world market for milk ingredients is worth approx. USD 32 billion and amounts to more than 10.5 million MT in 2016. Whole milk powder and skim milk powder obviously make up the bulk with more than 90% of this volume.“The main drivers for dairy remain intact – the world’s population continues to grow, living standards are improving, dairy consumption is increasing especially in the Asian region, and consumers are increasingly being motivated to buy products from a health and nutrition perspective”, says Tage Affertsholt from 3A Business Consulting.The report provides an overview of the current and expected future global market for milk ingredients. It is global in scope, with a comprehensive regional analysis of the EU, North America, Latin America, Eastern Europe, Asia and Oceania markets. Specifically, the report covers whole and skim milk powders, casein and caseinates, milk protein concentrates, milk protein isolates, total milk proteins, hydrolysed milk proteins, micellar casein, milk permeate powder, and fat-filled milk powder.Asia including China is the single major dairy market for whole milk power and skim milk powder in the world, however also rapidly catching up with the EU and the US regarding casein/caseinates and milk protein concentrates. Consumption of real high-end milk proteins is still dominated by the EU and the US.Production of milk powders is huge in Oceania, EU and US but for whole milk powder Asia, particularly with China and India, is a major producer. Casein/caseinates and milk protein production is really the domain of Oceania, the EU and the US.Oceania and in particular New Zealand is playing the leading role in export trade followed by EU and US. For the traditional milk powders, Asia and Middle East/Africa are the leading importing regions.The April/May issue ofThe World of Food Ingredientsfeatures an article co-written by Tage Affertsholt of 3A Business Consulting, entitled “Special Nutrition Needs Fuel Clinical Innovation,” which looks at market opportunities for the three primary market segments of clinical nutrition.
PontNutrition & Health has launched its new SUPRO XT55 Isolated Soy Protein, designed specifically to improve the profitability of ready-to-drink, high protein beverages by helping beverage manufacturers more effectively manage protein costs. “Soy protein has always been considered an economic alternative to dairy proteins, providing direct cost savings as well as more stable pricing over time. Now it’s even more relevant as plant proteins keep growing in popularity and demand,” says Jean Heggie, strategic marketing lead,DuPontNutrition & Health.“In beverages, blending dairy and soy proteins has become a popular formulation strategy for controlling costs, while driving better flavor profiles. However, when working with certain ready-to-drink (RTD) beverage formulas, traditional soy proteins would build too much viscosity or tend to be less stable over time limiting how much dairy protein we could effectively replace.  New SUPRO XT55 addresses those barriers,” Heggie says.With SUPRO XT55, it is now possible to replace up to 50 percent of the dairy protein in beverage formulations without compromising sensory performance or protein nutrition, the company reports. It provides the perfect balance of viscosity and protein stability, while delivering cost savings and exceptional flavor performance. Like all DuPont SUPRO Proteins, SUPRO XT 55 is a high-quality, sustainable source of plant-based protein, with all the associated nutrition and health benefits of soy protein.For years, beverage manufacturers have relied on DuPont to generate significant costs savings for their brands, while maintaining or improving flavor performance. “SUPRO XT 55 addresses the functional limitations of previous soy protein technologies by delivering lower viscosity and improved protein stability,” says Heggie. “With this new innovation, we can replace even greater levels of dairy proteins in these formulas for cost advantage, while delivering great-tasting, nutritious, high-protein beverages to the market.”With a Protein Digestibility-Corrected Amino Acid Score (PDCAAS) of 1.0, SUPRO XT 55 is equivalent in protein quality to dairy protein. Therefore, when replacing dairy, it will have no impact on the protein quality of the finished formula. Like other SUPRO Proteins, it is supported by years of clinical research, demonstrating its value for heart health, muscle building and maintenance, weight management and healthy growth and development.“SUPRO XT 55 expands the options beverage manufacturers have to control protein costs, while maintaining or improving flavor profiles,” explains Heggie. “Our sensory research proves that dairy and soy blends drive better flavor. SUPRO XT 55 now gives us a wider range of options to create protein systems for our customers that optimize flavor, cost and nutrition.”
The Hershey Company yesterday announced its first quarter sales and earnings, with consolidated net sales reaching US$1,879.7 million compared with US$1,828.8 million for the first quarter of 2016 and reported net income reaching US$125 million, compared with US$229.8 million for the comparable period last year. The company noted that retail sales had been impacted by the timing of Easter, which this year was three weeks earlier than last year."Net sales increased 2.8%, slightly less than our forecast and reflective of the broader soft US food-industry retail trends to start the year. Gross margin expansion was solid, which contributed to strong operating profit growth. First quarter US retail takeaway was primarily impacted by the timing of Easter, however, our market share gains were solid. The launch of Hershey's Cookie Layer Crunch bars got off to a good start and we're following that up with the roll out of Hershey's Crunchers candy and Reese's Crunchy Cookie Cups. Importantly, while preliminary, our Easter sell through is in line with our estimate and we anticipate Hershey US candy, mint and gum (CMG) April year-to-date retail takeaway will be about 2.5%," says Michele Buck, President and Chief Executive Officer, The Hershey Company.For the first quarter of 2017, reported gross margin was 48.2% versus 44.7% in the first quarter of 2016. Meanwhile, reported operating profit was US$191.9 million, a decline of 43.5% versus the same period in 2016, resulting in operating profit margin of 10.2%, according to the company’s report.The report indicated that consolidated net sales were US$1,879.7 million in the first quarter of 2017, an increase of 2.8% versus the first quarter of 2016. Excluding favorable foreign currency translation, a 0.1 point benefit, net sales increased 2.7% versus the year ago period. Net price realization was a 2.0 point benefit due to lower levels of trade. Net volume increased 0.7 points, including a contribution from the barkTHINS brand acquisition of 0.9 points.Adjusted gross margin was 47.5% in the first quarter of 2017 compared to 46.8% in the first quarter of 2016. The 70 basis point increase was primarily driven by favorable trade, supply chain productivity and cost saving initiatives and lower input costs, partially offset by other higher supply chain costs."In 2017, we remain focused on driving our North America core brands forward and achieving trial and repeat targets related to the launches of Hershey's Cookie Layer Crunch bars, Reese's and Hershey's Crunchers candy and Reese's Crunchy Cookie Cups," Buck says."Additionally, the branded snack mix and snack bites products that launched last year continue to do well, enabling us to expand our breadth across the snack wheel and capture new usage occasions. We anticipate that our innovation, as well as our consumer marketing plans, will enable us to build on our first-quarter US CMG market share gains. April year-to-date marketplace performance, driven by our seasonal business, is tracking in line with our estimates,” Buck says.Non-seasonal US CMG trends are expected to improve over the remainder of the year, Bucks says, although the growth rate is expected to be slightly lower than the company had previously forecast.“Additionally, macroeconomic challenges persist in China and we expect net sales for the full year to be lower there than 2016. Therefore, we estimate that full-year 2017 net sales growth will most likely be around the low end of our 2.0% to 3.0% outlook, including a net benefit from acquisitions of about 0.5 points. We expect the impact of foreign currency exchange rates to be minimal versus our previous estimate of a 0.25 point headwind,” Buck says."Our brands typically respond positively to marketplace investments and we continue to expect that advertising and related consumer marketing expense, as well as selling, general and administrative costs, will increase for the full year 2017 versus 2016. We believe these investments in marketing, technology, IT capabilities and analytic approaches will be enablers of profitable growth. Additionally, the company anticipates its effective tax rate will be slightly lower than its original forecast,” Buck adds. “As a result, the company expects the full year increase in adjusted earnings per share-diluted to be around the high end of its outlook of US$4.72 to US$4.81, a 7% to 9% increase versus last year."Hershey's North America first quarter net sales increased 2.7% versus the same period last year, to US$1,677.1 million. Volume was a 0.3 point contribution to sales growth driven by seasonal growth and, as anticipated, net price realization was a 1.2 point benefit due to lower direct trade, the company reported, adding that the barkTHINS brand acquisition and foreign currency exchange rates were a 1.0 and 0.2 point benefit, respectively.North America segment income, including candy, mint, gum, salty snacks, snack bars, meat snacks and grocery items, increased 4.5% to US$553.1 million in the first quarter, compared to US$529.4 million in last year’s first quarter. This increase in segment income was driven by a gross profit increase of about 3.5% versus the first quarter of 2016, partially offset by higher levels of selling expense, investments in greater go-to-market capabilities and increased depreciation and amortization.First quarter net sales for Hershey's International and Other segment increased 3.7% to US$202.5 million. Net price realization was an 8.7 point benefit and volume declined by 4.5 points. Excluding the 0.5 point impact of unfavorable foreign exchange rates, net sales increased 4.2%. Constant currency net sales growth in Mexico, Brazil and India was about 15%. China net sales increased mid-single digits on a percentage basis versus last year. The increase was driven by lower direct trade expense as gross sales declined versus the first quarter of 2016. Retail sales in the China chocolate category were about the same in the first quarter of 2017 as last year.International and Other segment income of US$1.7 million compares to a segment loss of US$13.2 million in the first quarter of 2016. Combined income in Latin America and export markets improved versus the prior year and performance in China benefited primarily from lower direct trade, the company report says.
Ajinomoto’s zero-calorie sweetener, Advantame, has been approved in Canada following the green light already being given by a whole host of other countries. Advantame has a clean, sugar-like taste, functionality and cost effectiveness, and can be used to replace caloric sweeteners and other high-potency sweeteners in foods and beverages while maintaining or enhancing the flavor profile.Advantame is now approved as a sweetener in the US, Mexico, Canada, Japan, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, Israel, Singapore and Turkey and this latest approval brings the number of countries where advantame may be used in foods to 39.As governments around the world encourage populations to reduce their sugar intake, advantame offers excellent sweetening solutions in food formulation. Its clean sweetness allows manufacturers to reduce the amount of sugar in their product without compromising taste.Additionally, advantame blends well with caloric and non-caloric sweeteners, which provides food and beverage companies an opportunity to reduce calories and manage sweetness costs.“We are pleased that Canada has approved advantame and look forward to assisting food and beverage customers in formulating great tasting products while still reducing sugar content,” says Rick Richard, VP of sales and marketing. For companies looking to reduce label impact of the “Added Sugar” line on the new nutritional statement, this sweetener is an excellent solution.
Royal DSM has invited entrepreneurs and innovators looking for financing and partnership to apply to attend an event with top DSM executives to explore business collaborations and investment opportunities. The Innovation Partnering Conference “Connecting Bright Innovations 2017” is to focus on new and innovative products and (bio)technologies that enable better food for everyone. The conference is to be held on 19-20 September at DSM's new Biotechnology Center in Delft, the Netherlands.Click to EnlargeInnovation is what turns DSM's Bright Science into Brighter Living; it is about discovering and integrating the best, most sustainable and commercially viable solutions to meet market needs, drive profitable growth and help towards feeding more than 9 billion people by 2050 in a healthy, tasty and sustainable way.DSM is looking to both finance and partner with innovative entities in this space that want to take their products and solutions to the next level. “Connecting Bright Innovations 2017” represents an opportunity for entrepreneurs and start-up companies to present their product or technology to an organization uniquely positioned to help realize its full commercial potential.This is the fifth such conference hosted by DSM. Previous editions have led to successful financing and partnership deals between DSM and attendees.DSM is seeking entries for innovative technologies and products with both near-term (<3 years to commercialization) and longer-term (>3 years to commercialization) applications in the following areas of interest:Sugar reduction and natural alternative sweetenersBio-preservation solutions for food and beveragesSalt reduction and other natural taste modulation solutionsSolutions to improve digestive health and bio-availabilityFood chain efficiency and food waste reduction solutionsFermentation and enzymatic technologies for new ingredientsThe role of new proteins in healthier, better tasting, more sustainable food products and production systemsClick to EnlargeThe conference will be held at the Rosalind Franklin Biotechnology Center on the DSM site in Delft. The center’s location at the heart of the Biotech Campus Delft allows DSM to rapidly develop and scale up biotechnology solutions for promising new ingredients for customer validation and commercial roll-out. The Biotech Campus Delft, an initiative of DSM Delft, Delft University of Technology, the City of Delft and the Province of South Holland, builds on the location’s existing competences and internationally recognized position as a world leader in biotechnology development. It brings together fundamental science and R&D, applications expertise, piloting and scale-up facilities as well as commercial and market insights and relationships on one location.The April/May edition ofThe World of Food Ingredientsfeatures an interview with Ilona Haaijer, President of DSM Food Specialties, and Gerhard Wagner, Director of the DSM Biotechnology Center. Speaking on DSM new center, Haaijer says, "“Technology plays a key role in finding solutions. We need to find a way to feed all the people and a way to do it healthily. We believe passionately in our purpose of enabling better food for everyone. We can apply our science-based competences and creativity to really unlock value for customers and create new innovations.”
Green Plains has entered into an asset purchase agreement to acquire two cattle-feeding operations from Cargill for $36.7 million, excluding working capital. The transaction includes feed yards located in Leoti, Kan. and Yuma, Colo. and will add capacity of 155,000 head to the company's operations. Upon completion of the acquisition, Green Plains Cattle Company will become the fourth largest cattle-feeding operation in the United States with total capacity of more than 255,000 head.As part of the transaction, Green Plains Cattle will also enter into a long-term supply agreement with Cargill Meat Solutions to provide a reliable supply of cattle from the Leoti and Yuma locations, as well as Green Plains' existing feedlot in Kismet, Kan., with appropriate flexibility and economic opportunities for both parties."The growth of Green Plains Cattle achieves one of our strategic initiatives of further diversifying our income streams and investing in adjacent businesses. This purchase also aligns with our overall strategy to meet growing global protein demand in downstream markets that take advantage of our supply chain, production platform and commodity management expertise," commented Todd Becker, president and chief executive officer of Green Plains. "A key component of the acquisition is the long-term agreement with Cargill under which Green Plains Cattle will be a strategic supplier of their beef-packing demand.”Green Plains Cattle Company currently owns a 70,000 head cattle-feeding operation near Kismet, Kan. and a 30,000 head operation near Hereford, Texas."One of the inherent benefits of this transaction is the scale of internal demand for our co-products produced at company-owned ethanol plants. Our cattle business will now consume more than 300 thousand tons of dried distillers grains and 40 million pounds of corn oil annually," Becker added. "The ability to effectively control our feed supply cost provides our cattle business with a strategic operating advantage resulting in more predictable and stable cattle-feeding margins while enhancing Green Plains' knowledge of ration dynamics. Since our entry into cattle feeding a few years ago, the meat and protein market fundamentals have remained favorable and the business has been accretive to Green Plains' earnings.”The Leoti and Yuma cattle-feeding operations consist of approximately 1,900 acres of land, supporting infrastructure and feed storage assets, which are strategically located near major meat packers. The transaction is anticipated to be accretive to 2017 earnings with completion expected in the next 30 days, subject to customary closing conditions and regulatory approvals.
Glanbia has developed BevEdge, a patent-pending technology that allows manufacturers to remove lecithin from protein powders and beverages, cleaning up the ingredient list and removing a potential allergen.Director of R&D at Glanbia Nutritionals, Brent Petersen, told us: “Usually when you have a protein powder and you add it into water it clumps and doesn’t dissolve. Industry for years has come up with instantanisation or agglomeration whereby you build a particle size so it disperses in water and you can stir the protein powder into a solution.“Typically industry uses soy lecithin to spray into the powder making the particles larger. But people don’t want soy allergens on the label and it’s an added ingredient on the label whereas the trend has been to clean and clear up labels. This technology replaces that.”Lecithin naturally occurs in egg yolks and soy and is used by the food industry as an emulsifier.Glanbia removes the need for the additive by treating the protein particles in a way that makes them dispersable in liquid. “We do it without adding any ingredients – no fibre, no lecithin, nothing. It’s a way of manufacturing the powder.”This manufacturing process can be applied to a variety of plant-based and animal-based proteins, such as pea protein isolate, whey, casein or milk proteins, and the ingredient can then be used in a product formulation like-for-like without needing to tweak the recipe.Glanbia said the BevEdge powder “is all about functionality” and allows for greater ease of flavouring and better flavour expression, although the colour may change slightly. The powder appears more “flowable” and less powdery. “It will pour out nicely from a powder stick,” Petersen added.It should also match standard protein powder for shelf-, light- and heat-stability, he said.The Kilkenny-headquartered company expected most initial demand to come from the North American and European markets. “But of course our market is bigger than that; it’s anywhere where people want a shorter ingredient deck and no allergens.”Although Glanbia has applied the technology only to drinks its potential applications are much wider, Petersen said.In 2016, Glanbia reported a 2.8% increase in wholly-owned revenue, hitting the €2.8 billion mark. 
The consumption of caffeinated energy drinks results in significant changes to heart function and blood pressure when compared to other drinks containing the same caffeine content.Findings gathered by a team from the US revealed that drinking a commercially available energy drink containing 320 milligrams (mg) of caffeine results in increased electrical heart activity and rises in blood pressure.These findings were in comparison to test subjects consuming a control drink also containing 320 mg of caffeine along with 40 millilitres (ml) of lime juice and 140 ml of cherry syrup in carbonated water.The conclusions suggest the proprietary energy blends used to create energy drinks that work in tandem with caffeine to produce these heightened effects.Commenting on the study, author Dr Emily Fletcher observed that those who consumed the energy drinks still had a mildly elevated blood pressure after six hours."This suggests that ingredients other than caffeine may have some blood pressure altering effects, but this needs further evaluation," added Dr Fletcher, who is also deputy pharmacy flight commander at Travis Air Force Base in California.With over 500 types of energy drinks on the market, the team commented that the increase in energy-drink-associated cases have prompted questions about their safety.With cases highlighting energy drinks’ links  to hypokaleamia and recommendations not to consume them during physical exercise , European regulatory authorities may need to re-examine what impact these beverages have on long-term health.Current European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) guidelines indicate that 400 mg of caffeine a day from all sources is not a safety concern.The same direction also applies to single doses of up to 200 mg for adults (18-65 years). This level remained safe when consumed less than two hours before intense exercise."We decided to study energy drinks' potential heart health impact because previous research has shown 75% of the base's military personnel have consumed an energy drink,” said Dr Fletcher.“Nearly 15% of military personnel, in general, drink three cans a day when deployed, which is more than we studied here," she added.Dr Fletcher and colleagues enrolled 18 participants between 18 and 40 years of age, into two groups.The first group received 32 ounces (oz) (946 millilitres (ml)) of energy drink containing 108 g of sugar, 320 mg caffeine, vitamin B2, vitamin B3, vitamin B6, and vitamin B12.  Typical energy drinks contain blends of taurine, panax ginseng extract, L‐carnitine, glucuronolactone, inositol, guarana extract, and maltodextrin. ©iStock/Elisanth_The drink also contained a proprietary energy blend of taurine, panax ginseng extract, L‐carnitine, glucuronolactone, inositol, guarana extract and maltodextrin.The other group was given the control drink containing 32‐oz control drink containing 320 mg of caffeine, 40 mL of lime juice, and 140 ml of cherry syrup in carbonated water. After a six-days, participants switched drinks.Electrical activity of the volunteers' hearts were measured as were their peripheral and central blood pressures at the study's start and at one, two, four, six and 24 hours after drink consumption.When compared to the caffeine group, they found those in the energy drink group had a corrected QT interval 10-milliseconds higher at 2 hours.“The QT interval is the measurement of the time it takes ventricles in the heart (the lower chambers) to repolarize, or prepare to generate a beat again. It's the pause from the end of the electrical impulse generating the heart to beat to the next impulse," Dr Fletcher explained."If this time interval, which is measured in milliseconds, is either too short or too long, it can cause the heart to beat abnormally. The resulting arrhythmia can be life threatening."Additional findings revealed increases in systolic blood pressure were seen in the energy drink and caffeine-only groups.However, systolic pressures in the caffeine group had almost returned to their original readings after six hours, not so for the energy drink group.Responding to the findings, The British Soft Drinks Association’s (BSDA), director general Gavin Partington said: “Caffeine in energy drinks is no different to caffeine in coffee so these findings are somewhat odd. “The European Food Safety Authority latest opinion confirms the safety of energy drinks and their ingredients and therefore does not provide any scientific justification to treat energy drinks any differently to the main contributors to daily caffeine intake including tea, coffee and chocolate. “It’s also worth remembering that coffees from popular high street chains contain the same or more caffeine than most energy drinks.” Source: Journal of the American Heart AssociationPublished online ahead of print: doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.116.004448 “Randomized Controlled Trial of High‐Volume Energy Drink Versus Caffeine Consumption on ECG and Hemodynamic Parameters.”Authors: Emily Fletcher, Carolyn Lacey, Melenie Aaron, Mark Kolasa, Andrew Occiano, Sachin Shah 
The Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) wants to see 20% of global fish and seafood certified sustainable by 2020, according to the strategy plan it released on its 20th anniversary.Tuesday saw the 20th year that the non-profit has been running, with 12% of global marine catch now being certified by the organisation.By the year 2020, MSC hopes to raise this figure to 20%, and by 2030 to have more a third of global marine catch to be engaged with the MSC program.Nicolas Guichoux, global commercial director at the MSC, said: “The core of the initial program is that we have a global vision and mission of sustainable fisheries globally. One of the reasons why the MSC was created was because over-fishing became a big issue especially in the early 90s.”Guichoux explained that over-fishing has tripled in the past 40 years going from 10% in the mid-70s to 31% today of the global fish stock.The main efforts going towards the 2020 goal will be to reward sustainable fisheries and introduce incentives for improvement, ensure MSC certifications are credible and reflect best practice, expand sustainable seafood markets in Europe and Asia and to build public awareness and support.Guichoux said one of the most important things the MSC is doing is raising awareness within the general public.  MSC Certified Label © MSCHe said this will mean the MSC certification label will be known - a great benefit for certified fisheries because they will get more recognition.As well as this, he said raising awareness will hopefully drive demand for sustainable fish."In Australia, we are working with chefs, NGOs and other partners to really celebrate sustainable seafood and try to explain to the general public that if they choose seafood, it's important that they look at if it's coming from a sustainable fishery because of the global problems facing fisheries," he said.The MSC also recently certified the UK hotel chain, Premier Inn, for using sustainable seafood in their restaurants.In China, the MSC holds the annual Sustainable Seafood Week where fish products which are sourced sustainability are highlighted.This summer will see the fourth event.The organisation say it will be investing in scientific research to create global campaigns that will educate the public.“While there is much to celebrate, there is also a growing sense of urgency to address unsustainable fishing and deliver Sustainable Development Goals. This is a critical time for our oceans. The MSC’s new strategy prioritises those parts of the world, species and markets which can have the most significant impact on the health of our oceans. It remains true to the vision of our founders, building on the lessons of the past,” said Rupert Howes, MSC's Chief Executive.In other news, MSC teamed up with Aquaculture Stewardship Council (ASC) and Lidl at the annual Seafood Futures Forum at Seafood Expo Global in Brussels yesterday.Lidl was one of the first large retailers to build sustainability into its procurement process, and its branches in Germany only sells MSC-certified products in its permanent, own-brand, fresh and frozen fish range.International corporate social responsibility manager at Lidl, Judith Kontny, delivered the keynote speech at this year's forum."We want to make sure that the products we sell are available in the long term and this is why their origins are so important. In the years that Lidl has worked with the MSC and ASC, we have witnessed more and more fisheries and producers achieving certification, but delivering our commitment still presents challenges," Kontny explained in her speech."For example, we are eager for more certified species, notably octopus and squid, and we believe more effort is needed to engage consumers in Eastern and Southern Europe in support of responsible and sustainable seafood".Lidl also plans to only sell products which are certified organic or by the ASC by 2018. 
Adding to cayenne pepper to food can curb hunger, increase satiety and reduce cravings for salty food - but it increases the desire to eat sweet and fatty foods, Danish researchers have found. Despite the fact that chilies have already been identified as being effective in increasing energy expenditure, the amount that must be eaten for this effect to take place makes it unrealistic – for most people the burning sensation is too strong.The team of researchers from the department of food science at Aarhus University in Denmark therefore wanted to determine whether a lower dose could have an effect on appetite and eating habits while still being palatable.  © iStock/wasan gredpree“The spiced soup led to a steeper decrease in hunger and increase in satiation than the non-spiced soup over the meal,” write the researchers. “A significant effect of soup was found on satiation by the end of the meal."One hour after intake this was still the case. Those who ate the spicy soup also felt more energised than those who had the control.“Furthermore, addition of cayenne pepper was found to increase the desire to eat fatty and sweet foods. The increased desire for sweet and fatty foods was however not re-found in wanting for or liking of the taste samples dominated by a sweet (dried banana and canned peach) and fat (whipped cream and avocado) sensory profile.”“Beside possible sensory alterations, sweet stimulation is known to relieve pain from irritants and could explain why sweet foods are desired during and/or after a spicy meal. This is supported by the fact that desire for sweet does not decrease as the meal containing cayenne pepper progress, whereas a drop in desire for sweet is observed during the meal without cayenne pepper.”However, the authors call for more research on the subject before these findings can be incorporated in guidelines for healthy eating in the future.A total of 66 individuals aged between 20 and 50 years old (all of whom liked spicy food and tomato soup) were recruited to take part in the study.The researchers used Karoline’s Køkken’s Classic tomato soup with thyme, manufactured by Arla Foods, and added 450 mg cayenne pepper per litre of soup, corresponding to 1.13 mg/L capsaicin and 40,000 Scoville heat units.Participants were given four questionnaires to complete that focussed on liking and desire to eat more of the soup; general liking of tomato soup, physical- and psychological well-being sensations and satisfaction.Previous studies have already suggested that capsaicin may reduce hunger and increase energy expenditure, especially for people who do not eat the spice regularly  © iStock and at high concentrations.However, the authors of a 2011 study published in Physiology & Behavior Journal said that the ingredient would not have the same effect if it was taken in the form of a supplement."It turns out you get a more robust effect if you include the sensory part because the burn contributes to a rise in body temperature, energy expenditure and appetite control,” the lead researcher concluded.Source: Appetite“Cayenne pepper in a meal: Effect of oral heat on feelings of appetite, sensory specific desires and well-being”Published online ahead of print,  http://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodqual.2017.03.007 Authors: B.V. Andersen, D.V. Byrne et al. 
NIZO, the Dutch food and nutrition contract research organization, and Process Systems Enterprise (PSE), a UK advanced process modelling company, have announced the formation of the Centre of Excellence (CoE) for food product and process modeling.The announcement was made at the Advanced Process Modelling Forum in London, UK, this week.The CoE will provide a single point service that combines mechanistic product and process modeling tools with food characterization techniques and semi-industrial scale pilot facilities.This will be achieved by integrating NIZO’s pilot facilities and experience in food characterization and modeling with PSE’s gPROMS modeling platform and unit operation model libraries.The companies said the integrated software and services solutions will result in better designed and operated processes with less variability, leading to better product quality, lower energy use – and hence CO2 footprint – and more flexibility when dealing with varying raw ingredients.Marc Goemans CCO at NIZO, said the new CoE allows the company to provide its customers with an advanced set of modeling tools and services for food product and process design and upscaling, based on true understanding of the underlying food science.Sean Bermingham, VP for PSE’s formulated products business unit, said the combination of mechanistic models and experimental data is a powerful approach that helps food companies to accelerate getting the right food products to market in the most cost-effective and sustainable way.  
Offering vegetables to babies early on can help reduce food fussiness in toddlers, according to a new study carried out in the Netherlands.Fussy eating behaviour – which is characterised by a limited dietary variety due to the frequent rejection of familiar and unfamiliar food items – is common in young children and a constant headache for parents. Often, it’s vegetables that offspring will regularly turn their noses up at.However, researchers at the Erasmus University in Rotterdam and the Nestlé Research Centre in Lausanne, Switzerland, believe they know how to ensure kids are easier to please. Children offered vegetables before the age of five months were “particularly less likely to be fussy eaters”, noted the team in their paper for the journal Appetite.Go for greens earlyThe team examined the links between infant feeding and fussy eating amongst 4,779 participants in the generation R study – an ongoing population-based prospective cohort study from foetal life until adulthood. They looked at the duration of breastfeeding and the timing of complementary feeding (when solid foods are first introduced).When children reached the age of four, parents were also asked to fill out the Children’s Eating Behaviour Questionnaire, which includes the food fussiness scale. The scale consists of six items assessing whether children are difficult to please with meals, display food neophobia (for example, “My child refuses new foods at first”), or have a limited diet variety. A higher score indicates increased fussiness.The experts had expected to find differences in fussy eating between children who were never breastfed and those who were breastfed for prolonged periods of time. This wasn’t the case, though: children that were never breastfed did not appear to differ in fussy eating from children breastfed for at least six months.However, they also discovered that “earlier introduction of vegetables was related to less fussy eating behaviour. Particularly children who were already introduced to vegetables between four and five months had a lower food fussiness score than children who were introduced to vegetables at six months or later,” they noted.It was a similar story for fruits or any solids, although the trend was not as strong and “not statistically significant”.Like (fussy) father, like (fussy) sonOf course, one explanation for this could be that the fussy children have fussy parents who are less likely to introduce veg early on. However, the findings merit further investigation, the team suggested. Indeed, a cohort study in France has also shown that weaning is a crucial stage  in the development of taste preferences.The research also adds to the current discussion regarding guidelines for the timing of complementary feeding in developed countries. Studies have suggested early introduction of solids can increase the risk of obesity , but research published in May last year  found no such link.Source: Appetite“Infant feeding and child fussy eating: The Generation R Study”Authors: Lisanne M. de Barse, et al. 
Vanilla is associated with children, roasted nuts with seniors and floral notes with adults, and the findings will provide "a deeper understanding" for tailoring new product development (NPD) to age groups, according to a recent study.If consumers intuitively assign certain food odours with different life stages, that's important for food manufacturers looking to develop new products for specific consumer groups.This was the hypothesis put forward by a group of Austrian researchers – and their theory, it turns out, holds water.Out of seven odours given to almost 400 volunteers - lemon, vanilla, lily of the valley, clove, candy, cucumber and roasted peanut - six were “significantly assigned” to a specific life stage.The majority of participants across all ages associated confectionery and vanilla smells with children; floral and spicy-brown with adults and green-cucumber and nutty to elderly people.Contrary to Kurt Cobain's lyrics, the researchers discovered that teen spirit does not in fact have a specific smell - adolescents were the only group that lacked a clearly associated odour. What’s more individuals who disliked a specific odour tended to assign it to seniors – a finding which may seem slightly offensive to older people, say the scientists, but which may stem from our own emotional connotations.While childhood and youth tend to be associated with positive feelings like optimism and health, old age is linked with depression, illness and death.  © iStockLead researcher Klaus Dürrschmid from the University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences in Vienna said this is the first study into the links between smells and life stages, and more work is needed to fully understand the topic. But even at this early stage, the findings are interesting for food industry.“Products designed for specific age groups are getting more and more important. A deeper understanding about odour and age associations can allow product developers to tailor products specific to age groups or purpose,” he told FoodNavigator.“A deeper knowledge about the conceptualisation of odours allows also to design products which fit much better into certain situations and consumption purposes.”In order for these kinds of implicit flavour associations to be successful, however, the product must have an overall ‘coherence’.“It’s crucial that extrinsic characteristics - packaging, labels, advertising and association clouds - match with the intrinsic (sensory) characteristics of the products. Understanding consumer’s associations with odours can help to improve this match and therefore potentially improve market performance,” Dürrschmid said.  © iStock/Stacey NewmanSo do manufacturers flavour children’s food with vanilla because this is a ‘natural’ association, or is the opposite in fact true – that people associate vanilla with youthfulness because it is commonly used in kids’ food?It’s difficult to say, said Dürrschmid. “However, it is well known that human milk has vanilla notes, which new-borns learn to love by the ‘liking by tasting’ effect,” he added. “In my opinion, vanilla is therefore used in kid's food, but of course the use in kid's food has a reinforcing effect on the liking of vanilla. “For instance, it could be shown in the Netherlands that individuals who grew up with vanilla-added milk products, show a clear preference for vanilla added tomato ketchup in their later life times.” Where do these age-smell associations come from? The researchers, among whom are members of the European Sensory Network, have some interesting theories:“Flowers are often associated with reproduction and sexuality and may be why they are connected more closely to the adults’ group,” they write.  © iStock“Spicy-brown is the flavour of ripeness and full development, which in terms of periods of life might be seen closer to adults than to other life stages. “The nutty and green flavours were associated with seniors. Nuts are fruits of the autumn and the surface of a nut is often – in analogy to the faces of old humans – very wrinkled. “Green is a harvest smell and perhaps the smell produced by elderly people cutting the lawn of their garden.“It is also well known that vegetables belong to children’s least accepted food category, an aversion which could explain why green odour is associated with seniors and not children.”In collaboration with global flavour house Symrise, which provided the smell solutions, the scientists selected seven flavours from distinct flavour 'families' all of which are authorised for use in all food categories in the EU: fruity-citrus (lemon oil), vanilla (vanillin), lily of the valley floral (linalool), spicy-brown clove (eugenol), confectionery (isoamyl acetate), green cucumber (E,Z)-nona-2,6-dienal) and nutty roasted peanut (2-methoxy-3-methyl pyrazine).A total of 397 individuals took part (76 children, 103 adolescents, 163 adults and 55 seniors) who, after smelling the different odours completed a questionnaire to determine their associations, liking and familiarity.Source: Food Quality and Preference“Smells like teen spirit: Associations between odours and stages of life – A preliminary study”Published online ahead of print, July 2017,http://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodqual.2017.02.016 Authors: Klaus Duerrschmid, Lukas Danner, Martin Wendelin, Elisabeth Buchinger et al. 
Nestlé is to move production of its Blue Riband chocolate brand from the UK to Poland with a loss of around 300 jobs.The Swiss confectioners’ Fawdon plant in Newcastle is expected to bear the brunt of the job cuts with its operations in York, Halifax, West Yorkshire, and Girvan, Ayrshire, also affected.These losses were expected to occur throughout 2017 and 2018. Nestlé added that these would be achieved through voluntary redundancies.In a statement, the firm said the proposals were being made to ensure the sites operated more efficiently and remained competitive in a ‘rapidly changing external environment.’“The proposed changes include amended and standardised shift patterns at each factory and, at Fawdon, the most complex of Nestlé’s UK confectionery sites, the transfer of Blue Riband production to a Nestlé factory in Poland. “This would mean being able to simplify and focus Fawdon’s operation.”As well as the Blue Riband brand, the Fawdon site, which is home to 600 jobs, also produces Rowntree’s Fruit Pastilles, Fruit Gums, Jelly Tots, Rolos, and Matchmakers.Its site in York makes KitKat, Polo and Milky Bar and was the original home of confectionery firm Rowntree’s, which was acquired by Nestlé in 1988.Nestlé, added that a 45-day consultation would start with trade unions and employee representatives.The company, which employs over 8,000 people in the UK, said it appreciated that this was an uncertain time for employees and would work hard to ensure all were supported through this difficult period. 
The EU will invest €220 million in water and food projects in the Mediterranean area as part of the PRIMA programme.         The Partnership for Research and Innovation in the Mediterranean Area (PRIMA) was announced today following an agreement reached by the Maltese presidency with the European Parliament on 11 April.The funds will be drawn from the EU’s research and innovation programme, Horizon 2020. "The PRIMA partnership will help improve the health and livelihoods of those living in the Mediterranean region. It is also expected to encourage economic growth and stability in the longer-term", said Chris Agius, the Maltese Parliamentary Secretary, on the day of the agreement.PRIMA must still be formally adopted by the European Parliament and the Council, which is expected in the coming months, and is due to be up and running in early 2018.The partnership involves 11 EU member states: Croatia, Cyprus, Germany, Greece, Spain, France, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Portugal and Slovenia; and eight non-EU countries: Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco, Tunisia and Turkey.  
The Irish minister for agriculture has presented a new seven-point Brexit plan for the food and drink industry, highlighting the country’s particularly precarious position as the UK’s neighbour and chief trading partner.Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine (DAFM) Michael Creed addressed over 600 farmers of the Irish Farmers Association (IFA) in Ko Kildare, Ireland on Monday to lay out his plans for Brexit negotiations.The UK is Ireland’s biggest trading partner with 41% of Irish food and drink exports sent to the UK – worth some €4.4bn per year.Creed stressed the “special relationship” should be treated as uniquely important in the coming Brexit negotiations, observing that without a trade deal the Irish market could stand to lose 20,000 jobs as exports would likely fall by around 40%.Already in 2016 the weakening of the pound sterling resulted in a drop of €570m worth of exports; Creed warned there would be “no upside” to Brexit, his new proposals amount to damage control.President of the IFA Joe Healy addressed the meeting and acknowledged, “The implications of Brexit for Ireland are clear – and they are stark. Ireland is the most exposed EU Member State, and the stakes are highest in our farming and food sector. The border creates serious challenges. Every year, thousands of animals and huge volumes of agricultural produce cross the border to Northern Ireland for further finishing or processing, as part of a highly integrated supply chain.”Warning against entering the Brexit process unprepared and allowing Ireland to be ‘punished’, Creed laid out seven key plans he believes essential for protecting Irish food industry interests.First – the establishment of a committee dedicated to ensuring market access, which will meet monthly to discuss progress and issues with international market access applications for the industrySecond – giving new resources to DAFM to work toward guaranteeing market access in third countries by ensuring the industry meets required standards in any given countryThird -  Bord Bia, Ireland’s food industry trade association, will be commissioned by DAFM to analyse potential third country markets for new trade deals and Irish exports.Fourth – New funding for ‘trade missions’ to foreign countries to promote Irish produce and encourage import of Irish foodFifth – Assessment of the ‘conditions of certification’ which currently control the export market and in some cases restrict the ease of exports and trade; Creed says DAFM should be funded to help the industry review these standardsSixth – Increase communication with the European Commission and enlist its help in resolving trade issues and easing the flow of exports to EU countriesSeventh – Creation of a new website collecting information on all open markets and products to facilitate and encourage trade.Creed said that already a huge amount of consultation and planning has been carried out, and that DAFM and the industry will enter the Brexit process “well prepared”.Addressing the Irish agriculture commissioner to the EU Phil Hogan, Healy finished his speech by reiterating the EU’s responsibility in aiding Ireland’s efforts to avoid catastrophe,  “Commissioner, the ball is about to be thrown in on the Brexit negotiations. To put it plainly, this is senior hurling. This is about Europe showing its commitment to Irish farming, it is about jobs, it’s about rural communities, it’s about farm families. Commissioner, Ireland’s farmers expect you to deliver.” 
Enzymes and food biotechnology giant Novozymes saw a 3% growth in sales in the first quarter of 2017, driven by strong performances in Food & Beverages and Bioenergy.Denmark-based Novozymes said resources are being focused on high-growth opportunities and growth markets while significant investments have been made in R&D and ‘technology leadership’.First-quarter sales for the firm were up by 3% organically (4% in local currency), while EBIT grew by 6%.Food, beverage and nutrition were strong performers for Novozymes, with growth in nutrition, driven by lactose reduction in dairy and higher sales for infant nutrition. Beverage enzyme sales showed solid growth, driven by raw material optimisation for brewing, while favourable developments for starches in emerging markets also helped matters.Novozymes said the full-year outlook is ‘maintained on all parameters’ – with a projected sales growth of between 2% and 5% and an EBIT margin of around 28%. It added that a new strategic collaboration with Boehringer Ingelheim for poultry probiotics will also contribute to growth in Animal health & Nutrition.“It’s been a good start to the year. The majority of our markets have developed well, and profitability was high,” said Peder Holk Nielsen, President and CEO of Novozymes. “Finally, our pipeline of new innovation is advancing. All in all: positive developments in Q1.” 
Coca-Cola says it will cut approximately 1,200 jobs after global carbonated drink sales fell 1% in the quarter to March 31.The cuts will begin in the second half of 2017 and continue into 2018 with the majority of cost savings coming from corporate job reductions, the firm's supply chain, marketing, and changes to its operating model.Commenting on the announcement during the company’s Q1 2017 operating results, James Quincey who will become CEO on May 1, said it is putting ‘in place a leaner corporate organization’.“While this will clearly be difficult for those impacted, these changes are critical for us to create an environment where we can accelerate growth and become the consumer-centric, total beverage company we need to be in a fast-changing world,” he said.“We do not take decisions about jobs lightly and we are committed to treating our people with dignity, fairness and respect throughout this process.”Coca-Cola and rival PepsiCo's sales have taken a hit as consumers in North America and Europe have increasingly turned away from sugary drinks.The firm said it was increasing its cost-cutting target by $800m in annualized savings, and now expects to save $3.8bn by 2019.Coca-Cola added it expected its full-year adjusted profits to fall by between 1% and 3%, compared with the 1% to 4% decline it had forecast in February.“In February, we shared with our people that we are in the process of designing a new operating model to support our growth strategy as we transform our business into a true total beverage company. And that this new operating model would anticipate our being a smaller company post-refranchizing, leverage new technologies and have a leaner, more focused corporate organization,” added Quincey. “This new structure we are putting in place is also part of creating the culture and speed necessary to support our new growth strategy. While there will be savings and job reductions associated with these changes, our first goal is to reduce complexity, simplify processes and speed decision making.”The company said it will achieve an additional $800m in annualized productivity savings by finding new ways to achieve more output with less input for any task or activity, or deciding to no longer do it because business needs or priorities have changed.“This is our objective, to free up resources to reinvest in growth as a consumer-centric total beverage company,” said Quincey.As the firm transforms into a total beverage company it says it is shifting from a ‘category cluster’ model to focus on five beverage categories – sparkling soft drinks; energy; juice, dairy and plant-based drinks; water, enhanced water and sports drinks; and tea and coffee.“While we’ve competed in each of these categories at various levels around the world for years, we are now being more disciplined about our investments across these categories globally to broaden our consumer-centric portfolio,” said Quincey.“This work includes launching new products through innovation, changing recipes for existing products to reduce added sugar, and acquiring new, on-trend brands in categories like tea, coffee and plant-based drinks.“Together, these efforts will build a portfolio for the long term that closely matches what our consumers and customers want.”  
New research shows exposure to Bisphenol A (BPA) in pregnant mice can disrupt the immune system and lead to multiple sclerosis in infancy, but experts say the chemical poses no risk to humans.BPA is used widely in plastics and resins used for food packaging, often finding its way into food products in trace amounts.The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) has put BPA under review numerous times, but consistently found it poses no substantial risk to the public in levels commonly occurring in food.New research from Stanford University indicates that exposure to BPA during pregnancy in mice leads to dysfunction of the immune system and development of diseases such as multiple sclerosis.The dangers of BPA to infants and pregnant mothers are well known; the only exception to EFSA’s opinion deeming BPA safe is a 2011 ruling outlawing use of all BPA materials in infant formula bottles.Last year, the Dutch president of the Council of the EU sent an ‘urgent’ request  to EFSA to again reevaluate BPA following a report by the Dutch National Institute for Public and Environmental Affairs (RIVM) indicating the threshold for dangerous exposure levels should be set far lower.The new findings at Stanford would appear to provide more evidence that any exposure to BPA during pregnancy is dangerous, but one notable expert has said the results are “at best phenomenology and of little if any relevance to human health”.  Dr. Warren Foster, professor of obstetrics and gynaecology at the school of biomedical engineering, McMaster University, explained that the levels of BPA administered to mice in the study was significantly higher than levels to which humans are exposed. “In this study BPA (1-3 mg per kilogram of body weight per day) was administered to female mice throughout gestation by oral gavage. The United States Center for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that typical human daily intake of bisphenol A is approximately 50 ng/kg body weight/day. Therefore, the mice in this study received a dose of BPA that was conservatively 60,000 times greater than the human exposure.”Foster said that even if the faster metabolic processes of mice were factored in, the proportions would be extreme relative to human exposure.Professor Richard Sharp of the MRC Centre for Reproductive Health at the University of Edinburgh agreed with Foster. “Based on the exposures used for these mice studies, there would be no comparable autoimmune health risk to humans”. “The lowest BPA dose used (1 mg per kilogram per day per pregnant mouse) translates to a human equivalent dose of 81 micrograms per kg per day, using established mouse-human conversion criteria (Reagan-Shaw 2008). Human BPA exposure across Europe (and in the US) is in the range of 20–40 nanograms per kg per day (Covaci 2015), which means that the highest (adult) human daily exposure to BPA is at least 2000 times lower than the lowest dose used in the mouse studies.”Despite expert opinion, the EU published draft regulations for stricter limits on BPA which indicated could be introduced by March this year, though this is yet to surface.  
Shopping for specialty foods could become easier after an EU committee voted to lift restrictions preventing retailers from selling products online to consumers living in another member state.The trade MEPs want to see the end of geo-blocking, a practice that means traders can refuse to sell goods or services to people living in other EU countries. Included in the vote was the decision to ban online retailers from declining a purchase made with a foreign bank card.The MEPs - members of the committee on internal trade and consumer protection (IMCO) - voted to back amendments to a draft proposal drawn up by the Commission to ensure that foreign consumers had the same access to goods and services as local customers.With the mandate approved by 31 votes to 2, with 1 abstention, draft rapporteur Róża Thun can now begin three-way talks with the Council and the Commission with the aim of reaching an agreement on the final law.“Consumers should be able to compare products from across the EU and buy those best suited for their taste and wallet,” said Monique Goyens, director general of The European Consumer Organisation (BEUC).“It defies core EU principles when retailers refuse to sell a product or service to consumers just because they live abroad or use a foreign bank card. This must become a practice of the past.”“Our work aims at a gradual opening of the European market for consumers and for traders by giving them clear rules. Consumers will have better access to goods and services online and for traders it will be less burdensome to sell to consumers from different member states,” added IMCO rapporteur Róża Thun.However, according to the director-general of industry association that represents the interests of retailers EuroCommerce, Christian Verschueren, one of the reasons traders are not willing to sell cross-border was legal uncertainty and despite the outcome of today's results, more could be done to clarify trader's position from a legal standpoint. “We have always supported the Regulation’s general aim of removing any discrimination against consumers, and are pleased with many of the amendments voted on today," he said."Unfortunately, despite the MEPs’ real efforts to find common-sense solutions to issues of legal clarity, the proposal in its present form will still do little to help in building a digital single market for SMEs, or satisfying consumers.”Verschueren added that harmonisation of very different consumer and other regulations across Europe was the only way to boost cross-border sales. He added that these updated geo-blocking regulations would deter SMEs from actively trading across borders as it left traders exposed to legal risk if they delivered to customers abroad."This will also not help consumers, who will have to arrange their own delivery, in gaining access to the best choice of goods at attractive prices. We appreciate the Parliament’s work in improving the text, but regret that what was a flawed proposal remains an imperfect one.”   The lifting of restrictions is an attempt to end the discriminatory practice of geo-blocking. ©iStock/Ali Kerem Yücel.The EU’s actions come on the back of previous findings  that revealed during website registration, 27% of online retailers prevented cross-border shoppers from successfully registering on their website.Further findings revealed that even if consumers reached the payment stage, 26% of websites shoppers couldn’t pay as their payment method was declined.Finally, in 37% of all websites, no information on delivery restrictions was clearly displayed on the starting page or during the ordering process.In 2015, the Commission’s Communication on the Digital Single Market (DSM) strategy for Europe, identified geo-blocking as a primary cause of consumer dissatisfaction and of fragmentation of the Internal Market.In response, the Commission set in place legislative proposals in 2016 to end the practice.While these proposals set out to end EU segmentation that geo-blocking causes, some geographical restrictions are needed and backed by law.For example, geo-blocking is used in legislative issues in prohibited products such as tobacco, alcohol or online gambling.However, many geo-restrictions may be considered as forms of consumer discrimination.A copy of the draft report is available  here. 
In its latest cleanup of its food facility registration database, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has culled an eye-opening 28% of existing registrations. The biggest drops happened in overseas sites.There is a natural erosion for this data set as with others.  Companies merge, go out of business, or simply neglect to renew their registrations at the appropriate time.  But the highest drops by far, when measured as a percentage of existing registrations, occurred in overseas facilities.  This leads one expert, David Lennarz, vice president of FDA regulatory compliance for Registrar Corp., to conclude that the vast majority of these purged registrations for overseas facilities happened as a result of of a new twist in U.S. regulations. A U.S.-based agent for a foreign firm must now affirmatively respond to FDA that it is acting in that capacity and that is accepts the potential liability that comes with it.  Without that assurance, FDA purges that particular registration, he said.“The data we have shows that it was basically a doubling of the reduction of registrations from the last cull in 2014. What this is really attributed to is the requirement for a U.S. agent to affirmatively assert that, yes, I agree to have my name associated with this foreign supplier and I accept what comes with that,”Lennarz told NutraIngredients-USA.To give some context, by far the biggest number of food facility registrations sent in to FDA come from domestic firms. In this latest cull, FDA purged 9% of domestic registrations, bringing the total number of U.S. food facilities registered with FDA down to 78,957 from 86,773, according to data collected by Registrar Corp.  So, to make up the total 28% drop, the declines in registered facilities overseas are truly eye-opening in some cases.  Here are some of the biggest declines among countries that are major food and dietary ingredient exporters to the U.S.:One of the requirements for a U.S. agent of a foreign firm is to act as a communications link between FDA and the overseas facility. FDA uses the U.S. agent to communicate important information to the foreign supplier (such as a Notice of Inspection), and the U.S. agent must accept responsibility for the communications between FDA and the foreign firm. The U.S. agent must also accept the liability for FDA re-inspection fees associated with the foreign firm.In some cases, Lennarz said, foreign firms may have sent in registrations listing their U.S. agent and have been unaware of these new requirements.  FDA then queries the agent, and if it receives no response, out the registration goes.  There is no requirement for the U.S. agent to inform its overseas partners that this has happened.  So a number of foreign facilities may only find out their registrations are invalid when a shipment gets held up because the registration number listed on the shipping documents comes up as invalid, Lennarz said.In a number of cases, as this new requirement phased in, Lennarz said U.S. agents may have concluded that certain foreign facilities were no longer worth the bother, as in the cases of facilities that only ship a few lots of material to the U.S. per year. But in other cases, major shipments of goods could be held up at the border.Lennarz said having an expired registration is not the end of the world and is something that can potentially be cleaned up on the fly. But it poses questions of delay and potential unnecessary expense, he said.“Something might be sitting in the port for two or three days before people even figure out what happened. If this in an air shipment, then time is even more of the essence,” he said.Lennarz said to avoid the hassle, foreign firms should check to make sure that their U.S. agents have responded to FDA (full disclosure:  Registrar Corp. acts as the U.S. agent for many foreign firms).  And he said this current issue with facility registrations is only a taste of what might happen when the rules associated with the Food Safety Modernization Act start to go into full swing in 2018.  In that case, under the Foreign Supplier Verification Program , U.S. agents of foreign firms that meet the definition of importers will have to ensure that food and dietary ingredients imported into the U.S. meet applicable U.S. food safety standards, including having a preventive controls plan in place.“Having a food safety plan is something completely new and up to now no one has had to have one,” Lennarz said. “Over the next six to 18 months companies will be asking their foreign suppliers to see their plans. The vast majority of companies don’t even know what you are talking about.” 
The Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO) has issued its first RSPO Next certification, a stricter voluntary add-on, to Colombian-based agribusiness Daabon Group.RSPO Next is a voluntary add-on that existing members can adhere to with stricter requirements on deforestation, development on peat, fires and human rights.After a six-day audit by third party, independent certification body, Control Union Certifications, Daabon's four palm oil estates in Northern Colombia, including 122 smallholder farms who supply the mill, were given the green light for compliance to RSPO Next.Deforestation: New plantations can only be grown in areas with low carbon stocks and areas must be set aside for conservation.Forest fires: While previous criteria included a simple ban on the use of fires except as a last case resort, Next growers must also have plans to prevent, monitor and combat fire on and around plantations.Peatlands: Growers must not plant on peatland.Greenhouse gases (GHGs): GHGs must be monitored, managed and reduced across the whole organisation and publically reported.Labour rights: Members must negotiate a compensation package for workers in countries where there is no defined decent living wage.Pesticides: Paraquet, linked with Parkinson’s disease and banned in the EU, is not permitted.A full set of the additional criteria can be seen here .Headquartered in Santa Maria, Colombia, Daabon’s oil palm plantation of around 9,950 hectares has been RSPO-certified since 2010, producing Identity Preserved sustainable palm oil.The CEO of Daabon, which also grows coffee, cocoa and bananas, Manuel Julian Dávila, said achieving the RSPO Next add-on reconfirmed the agri-food firm's commitment to sustainability. “We are especially proud to be the first group globally, together with our 122 small farmers, to show that RSPO NEXT Certification is challenging, but doable, also for smallholders.”  © iStock/ClariantRSPO NEXT policy was drawn up at the end of 2015. According to Stefano Savi, RSPO's global outreach and engagement director, the lapse in time between its creation and its uptake by industry is down to RSPO's consensus-based modus operandi. “Policies are important but building a solid system of implementation, based on consensus, is even more crucial and can take time," he told FoodNavigator.“This is why over the last one and a half years we have clarified RSPO NEXT processes and trained certification bodies to be able to perform the certification. On the grower side, certification also takes time from the initial audit, through the closure of any non-compliances and final certification."100% of Daabon mills and supply base will be RSPO Next certified for a period of five years as long as the Colombian firm passes the annual assessment that checks compliancy with RSPO’s Principles and Criteria.The RSPO is keen to see the add-on spread among other palm oil suppliers who are willing and able to sign up to RSPO NEXT to commit to it, said Savi, while stressing it was “not a ‘one-size-fits-all’ for all RSPO members”.“Growers [from other regions such as Indonesia and Malaysia] have indeed expressed interest, and there have also been public pledges towards achieving RSPO NEXT certification,” he said, citing the example of the IOI Group.“There is always room for more. We believe the best way to pull the palm oil supply chain towards RSPO NEXT certification, is for buyers to make a commensurate effort to source RSPO NEXT and certified sustainable palm oil –this boosts demand and creates incentives for growers to certify through RSPO NEXT.” 
The results of the FoodNavigator survey are in, and it's no holds barred as our readers reveal their hopes, fears and pet peeves about the food industry from squeezed margins, sugar taxes, the demise of traditional marketing and the threat of take-over from private equity firms.The general business mood is positive, and over 60% of respondents said they feel more positive about the future of their company now than a year ago compared to 23% who disagreed.But several readers expressed concern for the uncertainty that Brexit has generated for the business environment in Europe as a whole. “We’re still not sure how Brexit will affect our company activities,” said one reader, although others said they were already feeling the impact of the falling value of the pound sterling.“Companies are under major financial threat and concerned about take over from private equity firms,” said one reader. “We are working as hard as ever but it mainly depends upon our suppliers’ situation,” said another.Meanwhile, almost 63% said they expected profit margins to improve over the next year compared to 19% who disagreed – but margins are under pressure. “There is great pressure on operating and raw material costs that are becoming more and more difficult to absorb.”  Almost 400 readers took part in our survey, and of those around 60% said their company plans to invest more in new product development (NPD) this year than last year, with several respondents saying it was a way to "stay ahead".“NPD and innovation are the only way forward in the present uncertain climate,” said one.On taking on more staff, 38% said they would be recruiting more personnel this year compared to last while a similar number (40%) said this would not be the case.“We will be seeking to benefit from automation,” responded one individual, reiterating other comments about the need to downsize.One Belgian respondent said it is becoming increasingly hard to find skilled workers while another reader in the meat industry said it is difficult to find suitably qualified individuals to fill high-level positions.  “The food industry is not glamorous and hard work to the young,” lamented another.Traditional marketing channels to promote a company or product are diminishing in importance, with 61%  saying online marketing and social media would be more important in 2017.The reason is simple for one reader: “We can reach more people more cost effectively.” But some feel that, while these channels hold plenty of promise, the top brass just still don't get it.  “It should be [more important] but higher management is not convinced of the added value.”But of course, its use depends enormously on internet access in the region in question, with one reader commenting that traditional marketing is still very important in Nigeria.  The vast majority (83%) agreed that consumers now expect food and beverage companies to have a social mission as well as just making money although not everyone was convinced that fully-informed consumers are what's fuelling the trend."I am not sure that consumers are the real driver. I suspect marketing often leads to 'The Emperor's New Clothes'," wrote one reader. "NGOs and uninformed blog hysteria have a negative influence," added another.Nor are consumers always willing to put their money where their mouths are. "We have suppliers with good social responsibility - our customers are interested, but this doesn't influence the decision to buy."  A massive 89% said the negative spotlight on sugar will spur manufacturers to reformulate their products and make them healthier but there were some strong opinions on whether this would be effective. “Very few companies will do anything except reword their ingredients list,” said one six readers commented that, yes, companies will reduce sugar in their products but that this will not necessarily make those products healthier.“[They will] probably [reformulate] but they will be replaced with chemicals that will be marketed as unhealthy in the coming years. Overall, we are downgrading our food offering in terms of organoleptic delivery.”Most readers (71%) also believe more European countries will consider taxing sugar-sweetened beverages to improve public health this year, although several readers said this will be to generate tax revenue with public health an “excuse” for doing so.Our readers were divided over the impact of the trend towards mandatory country of origin labelling. A slight majority (38%) said it was worrying for suppliers and manufacturers operating in the European Union’s single market – “Consumers have no idea about the impact of this measure. Its emotional manipulation,” said one – while 31% disagreed with this and 31% said they didn’t know.Cleaning up a product’s label will be 2017’s top priority for just over half (52%) of respondents, with many readers saying their ingredients are already clean.  Will readers be investing more in organic ingredients and products this year? “Not until it's clear the consumer WILL accept the higher retail cost of new clean/organic products,” said one.Here’s a selection of your comments…“We are not going to save the planet by removing palm oil from our products, if people eat another oil, palm will be replace by sunflower or corn. The forest will still be destroyed.”“It’s important for all to establish credible sustainability standards and practices.”  “[Sugar reduction] will be at the expense of the consumer. The flavour and appearance will erode and the price will sharply increase. John Q. Public loses every time.”“Consumer education is more important than reformulating with sugar alternatives.”“Implementing marketing programmes for fresh fruits and vegetables that are equivalent to processed food marketing would be much more effective in motivating consumers to make better choices. If it works for processed foods why wouldn't it work for fresh foods?”"’Raised without antibiotics’ labelled products will grow, independently controlled by food certification bodies like Bureau Veritas.”  “There is not one organic certification system in place for all countries. This would not make sense.”“Organic ingredients are another market scam which lead to deadly food poisoning outbreaks, diminished quality of consumables and higher costs to consumers.”“I think it will be positive, if used correctly, to promote British products.”“[The impact] will become clearer when a decision is finally reached.”  “This is a re-cycled marketing ploy which will lead to a temporary increase in consumer demand.”“I don't really care to be honest, but we have to eat less meat whatever.” “’Cleaning’ ingredient labels while maintaining expected taste and functionality.”“The mergers of companies that are leading to huge groups [which] reduces the potential number of customers.”“Being nimble enough to anticipate the next trend, without being bogged down in processes.” "Reducing sugar."  “Consumer approval on the reformulation of products (sugar reduction & addition of functional ingredients).”“Dealing with the latest fear mongering of food and food ingredients and the demonisation of established science and food safety practi­ces.”“Complying with ever increasing food safety demands.”“To promote ingredients that have excellent clinical study result but no EFSA claim approved.” 
Nearly 26 million litres of fake alcohol has been seized as part of an INTERPOL-Europol operation.Counterfeit alcohol was the most seized product, followed by meat and seafood in the sixth Operation Opson, which involved 61 countries.More than 9,800 tonnes and 26.4 million litres of fake food and drink worth an estimated €230m were seized during 50,000 checks at shops, markets, airports, seaports and industrial estates.Products detained ranged from alcohol, mineral water, seasoning cubes, seafood and olive oil, to luxury goods such as caviar.The totals are down from last year for food and up for beverages as more than 11 tonnes and nearly 1.5 million litres of items were seized by 57 countries. Results in the fifth Operation Opson found fruit and vegetables were the second most counterfeited category with alcohol a high-risk as more than 385,000 litres of fake drinks were seized.Issues in EuropeChris Vansteenkiste, head of Europol's Intellectual Property Crime Coordinated Coalition - IPC3, said it saw some new trends, such as counterfeit mineral water.Officials in Bolivia with counterfeit alcohol. Picture: Interpol“Once again the good cooperation on a European and global level was paramount to disrupt the criminal gangs behind the illicit trade in counterfeit and unregulated food and drink."Italian authorities seized more than 266,000 litres of mineral water (almost 32,000 bottles) in Lazio imitating a registered trademark.Labels and shapes of the containers were similar to genuine products. Investigations revealed the water came from the same source.However, no market authorization had been granted and one person was arrested.In Russia, police took action against illegal alcohol production and distribution networks. In Leningrad, officers found a factory producing and bottling sub-standard alcohol and using faked federal stamps.The German operation focused on undeclared peanuts, cashews and almonds in hazelnut products imported into the country.When 1,300kg of roasted chopped hazelnuts were checked, German authorities detected 8% of mixed peanuts. In 500kg of hazelnut paste, up to 45% of mixed cashew nuts were found. In another hazelnut paste, 27% of mixed almonds were present.As the products were not labeled as containing allergenic substances there was a potential health risk for allergy sufferers and they were withdrawn from the market.Greek authorities discovered two illicit storage sites of alcohol last month.The investigating team found products were smuggled mostly from Bulgaria to evade excise duties. Almost 1,300 litre of smuggled alcohol (vodka and whisky) was seized and five people arrested.More than 300,000 cans of fish were held following a raid on a factory in Porto by the Portuguese Food Safety and Economic Authority (ASAE).The Danish Veterinary and Food Administration analysed olive oil sold in supermarkets to check compliance with labelling rules.Results showed that numerous samples were not virgin olive oil as presented but blended or lampante oil. Most of the companies voluntarily removed the bottles from markets.The plant’s license to process food had been withdrawn and illicit activities included repacking almost expired goods.Other items seized included 16 jars of tomato sauce, 9,900 packing boxes, 24,730 labels and 700 kilos of salt.Operation Opson VI ran between December 2016 and end of March this year.Asia, Africa and AmericasIn Togo, police seized nearly 1,000 canned drinks and 2,000 boxes of pasta. Picture: InterpolFrançoise Dorcier, coordinator of INTERPOL’s Illicit Goods and Global Health Programme, said the operation showed criminals will fake any food and drink with no thought to human cost as long as they make a profit.“Whilst thousands of counterfeit goods have been taken out of circulation, we continue to encourage the public to remain vigilant about the products they buy.”In Indonesia, the National Agency of Drug and Food Control discovered a factory producing fake condiments and sauces in unsanitary conditions.Nearly 32,000 boxes worth an estimated €360,000 were recovered and tests showed they contained additives exceeding recommended maximum amounts.Condiments was the most faked or illicitly traded product, representing 66% of all seizures, in the 2016 Operation Opson. Peruvian authorities seized expired food and drinks including colorants, estimated at around €145,500.More than 6kg of fat was found in poor storage conditions with insects and rats in the preparation area.In Nigeria, the National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and Control seized more than 51 litres of fake champagne.The annual operation was supported by customs, police and national food regulatory bodies as well as the private sector. 
A new experimental dairy farm has been opened in Spain.The Monells Cattle Farm (EVAM) at IRTA is located in Monells (Girona).  IRTA is a research institute owned by the Government of Catalonia.EVAM is intended to be a tool to serve the interests of industry and the Catalan region, and be a platform for research, experimentation and transfer.The farm combines knowledge of climatology, agronomy, plant production, water and excrement management, animal handling, genetic and reproductive improvement, and animal well-being and health, to improve competitiveness and sustainability throughout the milk industry.EVAM's aim is for the milk industry to benefit from the application of new tools for genetic improvements and health, new food models and the handling of animals, and to improve productive efficiency and reduce environmental impact.It will also work with industry to develop new technologies to help create and market dairy products.The project has involved an investment of €2.4m ($2.6m) in buildings and equipment, to which the Provincial Council of Girona, the regional ERDF, the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness and IRTA have contributed equally.The farm currently has 60 cows, but it will expand to up to 120.EVAM is based on a concept of comprehensive research, as it seeks to integrate all the elements that influence milk production, from fodder production to the management of excrement, to informing consumers and the general public.1. Research directed at generating new knowledge, to help solve technological and innovation challenges in the industry.2. Transfer of results, to contribute to improving industry competitiveness, seeking to increase production efficiency, health and well-being of the animals, as well as in the quality and differential and added value of dairy products and derivatives.3.  Informing the public about the production process of milk and its treatment up to its consumption, by implementing proactive informative and promotional actions.The services of EVAM are expected to help the dairy industry in several ways.The goal is to evaluate, test and apply new tools, strategies, techniques and products, to improve the efficiency and sustainability of farms.EVAM will also publicize new improvements in field management, the handling of animals and their excrement, and the latest technologies applied to obtaining dairy products.It will also be a meeting point for dialog with different stakeholders, to promote research, development and transfer projects from the farmer to the consumer.The farm is expected to be a facility where new farmers and entrepreneurs in the dairy industry are trained in the technical aspects of agricultural production and the dairy production process.EVAM will also interact with the public to explain elements of milk production. 
Manning Impex has added a range of Tao Kae Noi tempura battered seaweed snacks to its lineup.UK-based importer and distributor Manning Impex has added Tao Kae Noi seaweed snacks to its Asian snack portfolio.NI André Cheong, MD of Manning Impex, told BakeryandSnacks he believes the developer of the snack, Aitthipat Kulapongvanich, has not only brought seaweed snacking up to date with Tao Kae Noi Thai snacks, “but has actually made it its own snacking category”.The crispy seaweed snacks have made an impression on the local Asian market since launching in 2004, and Cheong expects a similar impact on the UK market.“The British embrace international food and flavors,” he said.The company was exhibiting at IFE 2017, held in London at the end of March, showcasing a tempura battered seaweed snack in various flavors, including Classic, Hot & Spicy and Tom Yum Goong.“Manning Impex has been the UK’s and Ireland’s gateway to the world of exotic foods from South East Asia for 30 years,” said Cheong.The company was set up in 1987 by Cheong’s parents and today imports more than 1,100 product lines sourced from 45 sole agencies from countries including Thailand, The Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore and Japan.Five years ago, leadership of the company reverted to Cheong and his brother.“Having spent 25 years in food retail and then coming into the wholesale trade gave me a good perspective in understand what customers are looking for,” he said, noting the company’s development strategy is centered on increasing brand awareness. 
A spate of recent reports have accused a top member of Scotland’s food standards agency of bias after revealing her financial ties to a major chocolate firm - is the junk food industry meddling with objective scientific research?Carrie Ruxton, who regularly contributes comments and opinion to FoodNavigator, has come under fire recently over her alleged ties to chocolate manufacturer Ferrero.A member of Food Standards Scotland (FSS), Dr. Ruxton is one of the UK’s top nutritionists, appearing regularly on television and working with a range of public health bodies including the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA).Reports last week questioned the former Conservative Party candidate’s consultancy work for Ferrero. Ruxton has contributed research and advice to Ferrero's corporate social responsibility programme since 2014. Food journalist Joanna Blythman called the revelation “simply unacceptable” and accused Dr. Ruxton of “unsuccessfully attempting to downplay the very real damage that sugar does to public health”. Blythman said she was unfit to sit on FSS and offer nutritional advice to the public. @JoannaBlythman Joanna, you've known about my freelance links for years yet only raise this now. I am wondering what has motivated it. Ruxton released the following response , defending her position at FSS and the breadth of her experience in the industry:“My long-term and broad experience of the food industry – working with nearly 100 different companies and trade bodies since 2004 – as well as my track record in the public sector writing obesity strategies and audits, have given me the knowledge to serve effectively on the Food Standards Scotland Board since April 2015 […] My work does not involve the promotion of dietary messages that conflict with those of Food Standards Scotland. Up until now, no-one has expressed any concerns about this work and the Chairman of Food Standards Scotland has been aware of my freelance activities since appointing me."She also defended her record of publishing quarterly declarations of interest, saying it goes “well beyond the minimum required by listing the types of work that I carry out for clients”.Ruxton says her connection to the industry has brought companies and consumer groups together to discuss reformulation, advertising and ingredient issues for the better.  Dr. Carrie Ruxton She went on to dismiss allegations, published in The Times, that she opposed the UK's sugar tax – to be implemented in 2018 – saying that doubts she held previously over the practical effectiveness of such measures have been resolved by evidence from Public Health England and details of the legislation itself.Even so, other researchers such Dr. Simon Capewell - professor of clinical epidemiology at the University of Liverpool, told The Times that Ruxton's consultancy work amounted to a “major conflict of interest” rendering her position at FSS “untenable”.  Dr. Simon Campbell, professor of public health and policy, voiced concerns over a long history of corporate sponsorship in scientific research; major tobacco firms were infamously found to have funded and manipulated research on the health effects of smoking, and last year documents were uncovered  exposing the sugar industry's efforts to downplay the dangers of sucrose in a similar manner. In the latter case, the findings show the sugar industry successfully paid university research departments to produce results that would look favourably on sugar's role in the diet and to shift blame for diseases such as coronary heart disease onto fats. Campbell thus argued in a report  last year that no industry funding of scientific research should be accepted, saying it would ultimately minimise public policy and legal liability.  
Consuming protein from plants rather than meat greatly reduces chances of type 2 diabetes, new research shows.Results from a 19-year study show that those consuming diets rich in vegetable proteins have reduced levels of type 2 diabetes (T2D) compared to those consuming similar protein quantities from meat.This is the first long term research indicating the benefits of replacing meat based protein sources with plants, and to find that meat protein itself is not a diabetes risk factor - other compounds within meats aid the spread of diabetes. Those consuming the highest quantities of plant-based protein had a 35% lower risk of T2D onset than those consuming the lowest quantities.Using mathematical modelling, researchers estimated that by replacing just 5 grams of meat based protein per day with vegetable substitutes, the overall risk could decrease by 18%.Researchers also determined that the overall consumption of protein has no direct link with T2D, and that other substances within meat and fish – particularly processed white meat and unprocessed red meat – are attributable to T2D risks.Higher consumption of plants – particularly grains and potatoes, and eggs - contributed to lower levels of the disease by omitting other compounds found in meats from the diet. Whilst there exists a wealth of research linking high meat consumption - particularly red meats - with diabetes and cardiovascular diseases, there is less understanding of how different sources of proteins vary in associated risks. As stated in the report, "The roles of different dietary proteins in the aetiology of (T2D) remain unclear".In 2011 a study  in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition showed a 100 gram daily serving of red meat could increase risk of T2D by 19%, the chances were found to more than double when meat was processed. The Kuopio Ischaemic Heart Disease Study (KIHD), an ongoing research project at the University of Eastern Finland, began examining participants in 1984. All participants were male, aged between 42 and 60 at the time of the projects launch, and none had been diagnosed with T2D.19 years later, 432 of the original 2332 participants were suffering from the disease. Researchers used dietary records, questionnaires, blood glucose measurements and oral glucose measurements to determine diabetes risk.The findings showed that replacing 1% of total energy intake from animal protein with plant protein was associated with 18% decreased risk for T2D, this association remained after results were adjusted for the varying body mass index (BMI) of participants. Another finding was that replacing 1% of energy from carbohydrates with energy from protein was associated with a 5% increased risk of T2D - but this association collapsed after adjusting the results for varying fibre intake. The results were published in the British Journal of Nutrition. Source: British Journal of Nutrition Published 2017; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007114517000745 Title: 'Intake of different dietary proteins and risk of type 2 diabetes in men: the Kuopio Ischaemic Heart Disease Risk Factor Study'Authors: Heli E. K. Virtanen et al.  
Being overweight and following a high-fat diet appears to reprogram virus-fighting immune cells into disease-promotors in a discovery that sheds light as to why the liver produces an excess of glucose in diabetics.Experimenting on human livers and mice cells, the scientists found that obesity can cause specific white blood cells (liver CD8+ T cells) to turn from removing viral infections into inflammatory cells that increase blood sugar and worsen insulin resistance.The discovery also adds further insights into why the liver overproduces glucose in diabetic patients.It is thought a pro-inflammatory response interferes with normal metabolism in the liver, jamming up or blocking insulin signalling to the liver cells.This causes the organ to continue producing sugar that floods the bloodstream."This response never manifested itself until humans started to eat high-sugar, high-fat, high-calorie diets," said Magar Ghazarian, lead author previously from the Department of Immunology, University of Toronto.According to fellow study author Dr. Shawn Winer the findings move diabetic research from a nutritional and hormonal condition to one that has a heavy immune system and inflammation influence.“That's the developing link, he commented.  “Inflammation is emerging to be a major mediator of insulin resistance."Type 2 diabetes is one of the fastest growing diseases in Europe with about 60 million people currently afflicted.The World health Organization (WHO) projects diabetes deaths will double between 2005 and 2030.Being overweight or obese is an important risk factor for diabetes. It is estimated that about 10.3% of men and 9.6% of women aged 25 years and over in the European Region have the condition.  Mice were fed with either a normal chow diet (NCD - 15% kcal fat) or a high-fat diet (HFD - 60% kcal fat). ©iStock/Marques PhotographyResearchers from the University of Toronto fed mice with either a normal chow diet (NCD - 15% kilocalories (kcal) fat) or a high-fat diet (HFD - 60% kcal fat) starting at 6 weeks of age for 16 to 32 weeks.Compared with NCD–fed mice, HFD-fed mice showed worsened glucose tolerance test (GTT), insulin tolerance test (ITT), and increased triglycerides in the blood.In addition, there was a substantial increase in the numbers of CD8+ T immune cells in the liver, indicating an altered immune response.Instead, these cells launch an inflammatory response to fat and to bacteria that travel to the liver from the gut through the blood.The cells then produce increased numbers of cytokine proteins – part of the pro-inflammatory response that interferes with normal metabolism in the liver, blocking insulin signalling to the liver.In further work using human liver cells, higher levels of CD8+ T cells were linked with higher levels of blood sugar or more advanced fatty liver disease. “We found that under conditions of obesity and a high-fat diet, the cells that typically strengthen our immune system by killing viruses and pathogens instead increase blood sugar. They become pathogenic and worsen insulin resistance," said Dr Daniel Winer, assistant professor at the Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology and Immunology, University of Toronto."The immune system in the liver represents a key missing link in our understanding of how the liver malfunctions in obesity to dysregulate sugar levels," added Dr Xavier Revelo, a post-doctoral fellow also based at the University’s Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology and Immunology.The liver is an organ that is particularly affected by the effects of obesity and a high-fat diet.Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), which can progress to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) are manifestations of metabolic syndrome in the liver.While the underlying mechanisms linking fatty liver, inflammation, and insulin resistance (IR) are largely unknown, NAFLD has been associated with enhanced proinflammatory cytokine  markers.The team thought that CD8 + T cells could potentially be used as markers for the progression of fatty liver disease.Current estimates  place the number of people suffering from a chronic liver condition in the European Union at 29 million.Source: Science ImmunologyPublished online ahead of print: doi: 10.1126/sciimmunol.aai7616 “Type I interferon responses drive intrahepatic T cells to promote metabolic syndrome.”Authors: Magar Ghazarian, Xavier Revelo, Daniel Winer, Shawn Winer, Daniel Winer 
The IOI Group is one of the largest palm oil traders in the world and it’s just made a significant commitment to protect Indonesia’s forests, address the problems on its own plantations and set a new standard for the entire industry.The IOI Group was suspended from the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO) for alleged violations of sourcing standards, in respect of complaints against its Indonesian subsidiaries’ plantation estates last year. This obviously impacted stakeholders and the reputation of the group.Some months later, in August 2016, IOI Group regained its certified status but some companies were still reluctant to use the supplier. At the time multinationals Unilever and Mondelez said they were reluctant to source palm oil products until IOI showed tangible improvements on the ground.This then prompted the group to work even harder on its policies and practices and in the same month as the temporary suspension was lifted, the IOI Corporation launched its updated Sustainable Palm Oil Policy (SPOP) alongside a comprehensive Sustainability Implementation Plan (SIP).Now less than one year on, the company says it is marking nine months of progress by announcing additional commitments to strengthen the implementation of its Sustainable Palm Oil Policy.In a statement from CEO OF IOI Corporation Berhad, Dato’ Lee Yeow Chor, says: “IOI is pleased to announce progress in key areas of its SPOP as well as the introduction of additional commitments.”“These new commitments will serve both enhance field implementation and ensure ongoing best-practice management in the palm oil supply chain,” he says.Additional commitments include undertaking an independent verification of policy implementation as well as a commitment to implement global best-practice peatland management in the Ketapang, Indonesia, landscape.Specifically, IOI has: Started working on a joint approach with international NGOs and grassroots to ensure the core principles of the RSPO are upheld in the resolution of the Long Teran Kanan Complaint and addressed the labor issues highlighted by Finnwatch in its Peninsular Malaysia plantations, including the ending of all recruitment fees.IOI has commissioned external consultants Business for Social Responsibility (BSR) to transparently verify its progress and to assess and recommend solutions to any labor issues in its Sabah plantations and committed to implement global best-practice peatland management in the Ketapang landscape, including the peatland standard currently being developed by the Palm Oil Innovation Group (POIG). It has also developed and communicated to suppliers new mechanisms to proactively monitor its third-party suppliers to ensure compliance to its policy commitments, as well as analyzed the exposure of its supply base to peatland and committed to minimize and mitigate the impact of third-party suppliers on peatlands.In addition, IOI has also promised to commission an independent verification of the implementation of its Sustainable Palm Oil Policy, and the commitments stated above, in the second quarter of 2018.IOI stands firmly committed to the implementation of its sustainability policies and believes that its progress in key areas - combined with these new commitments and measures – sends a strong signal to stakeholders around its desire for continued improvement,” continues Chor.“The company will continue to engage stakeholders in its sustainability journey and looks forward to playing a leading role in ensuring sustainable global palm oil supply chains.”Campaigners Greenpeace International welcomed the latest IOI commitments.For several years, the group has been exposing how IOI has been linked to the destruction of valuable forest and peatland areas, exploitation of plantation workers including reports of child labor, and extensive fires on its land contributing to the thick pollution that often swathes large parts of Southeast Asia. And because IOI buys so much palm oil from hundreds of other growers and traders, it was linked to environmental and social problems happening on land controlled by those companies.Greenpeace says that over the years IOI has produced “a string of commitments about ending the destruction, but none of them were properly implemented and failed to make a difference on the ground.”However, they add that losing big customers “put IOI under enormous pressure and was instrumental in bringing about this change in direction.“Today's announcement goes much further than anything IOI has promised before. It has said it will commission independent verification of how well forests and the rights of workers and communities are being protected on its own land. IOI has also committed to resolve long-standing conflicts with local communities and respect the rights of plantation workers.”“One of the most important points is that IOI will be actively monitoring its suppliers to ensure they too are safeguarding forests and people. Any company selling palm oil to IOI will need to prove it is protecting forests, so the impacts should spread far beyond IOI's own operations.”“Deforestation is still a huge problem for the palm oil industry and the traders need to act immediately to eliminate deforestation from their supply chains. They need to publish their own rigorous plans showing how they will screen their suppliers and cut off those that are continuing to destroy forests.”“The proof, as always, is in how well these promises are put into practice. There is still a lot of work to do before IOI is completely free from deforestation. We will be monitoring progress closely and won’t hesitate to challenge IOI if we think it’s not keeping its word."By Gaynor Selby
Australians have been waiting five years for the federal government to hatch a plan on free range eggs – but the result has been branded a farce by a consumer advocacy group as it relaxes the rules for egg producers who will be able to advertise eggs as “free range” under a standard that crams hens closer together and does not even decree for the birds to go outside.But despite the heavy criticism, Australia’s Small Business Minister Michael McCormack insists that consumers will now have the information they need to make informed choices when it comes to purchasing free-range eggs, “thanks to a new information standard registered under the Australian Consumer Law.”“I want to ensure Australians are fully informed when they purchase products. The new free-range egg labeling information standard gives Australians more information about the eggs on supermarket shelves, so they can make an informed choice when choosing between available brands,” he says.“The new standard will also remove uncertainty faced by producers who choose to label their eggs free-range.”Minister McCormack said the new standard was reached after many months of consultation with industry and consumer groups, with hundreds of submissions received during public consultations.“Eggs are a staple ingredient in the average family’s weekly grocery basket. Prices widely vary depending on a number of factors including the use of a free-range label.“The information standard will require eggs labeled as free-range to have been laid by hens that had meaningful and regular access to the outdoors and with an outdoor stocking density of 10,000 hens, or less, per hectare.“The stocking density will need to be prominently displayed on the packaging to allow easy comparison between different eggs on supermarket shelves. While a number of stakeholders argued for this stocking density to be lower, my decision takes into consideration the views of consumers, advocacy groups and industry, and provides a sensible balance with a focus on informing consumers – so they can make the choice that’s right for their needs.”Free-Range FarceConsumer advocacy group CHOICE has branded the move a “free range farce”, claiming its shoppers who will lose out in the new free range egg standard.Tom Godfrey, from CHOICE, says consumers will be paying for eggs that don't meet their understanding of free range."It's extremely disappointing that the new standard on free range eggs locks in a cap that is more than six times the previous voluntary limit of 1,500 hens per hectare.  says Godfrey."We believe the new standard fails to meet consumers' understanding of what free range actually means."Godfrey adds that while stocking densities need to be printed on the pack, there is no requirement for information to be displayed consistently, or in a way that would help consumers compare free range egg products.Free Range Finally UnscrambledMeanwhile the Egg Farmers of Australia (EFA) has welcomed the finalization of the Free-Range Labeling Information Standard, claiming that it will bring “simplicity and clarity” to the term free range, while also ensuring that when consumers choose to buy free range they will know exactly what they are getting.“Under the new standard, every farmer must give their hens meaningful and regular access to an outdoor range. Any hen who wants to go outdoors will be able to do so, if she chooses to. People will also be able to see on egg cartons how many hens per hectare there are on the farm. Displaying stock density information on egg cartons gives the choice to consumers,” says John Dunn, CEO, Egg Farmers of Australia.“This is a win for consumers and a win for farmers. Consumers will now have confidence that when they buy free-range that’s what they’re getting. They’ll also have more choice with stocking density to be displayed on carton.”“After years of uncertainty, farmers will have the confidence to invest in new free range farming facilities and technologies, such as new environmental controls in sheds to keep hens cool during summer and enrichments to range areas.”“EFA supports consumers in their right to choose which type of eggs they want to buy – whether that be from free range, barn or caged hens. We look forward to the new labeling standards being implemented.”
Olam Cocoa has marked the opening of its latest Cocoa Innovation Centre (CIC) in Willowbrook, Illinois, just outside of Chicago. The new facility will provide important innovation capabilities to support Olam Cocoa’s North American customers.The opening of this latest CIC, one of six globally, along with Centres in Brazil, Netherlands, Spain, Singapore and UK, will assist customers in the refinement and reformulation of existing recipes, provide proof of concept opportunities, and aid in the development of new products across such diverse application categories as beverages, cereals, chocolate confectionery, dairy, biscuits and bakery, and ice cream.Click to EnlargeRinus Heemskerk, Global Head of Product Development and Innovation noted that: “The facility will also host regular educational and application-specific seminars as part of a range of services designed to greatly reduce product development cycle timelines and help customers keep pace with changing consumer tastes and market trends.”Olam Cocoa is also unveiling the new branding look of its portfolio of cocoa product brands, deZaan, Unicao, Macao, and Joanes, as well as announcing the launch of a completely new cocoa product brand for the North American and Asia Pacific markets, Huysman. As a region-specific brand born out of the heritage of deZaan, starting in Q3 2017, Huysman will offer a focused selection of value driven, best-in-class cocoa powders to these markets.Gerard A Manley, CEO of Olam Cocoa, added: “By investing in modern facilities like Willowbrook we support our customers to satisfy consumer needs, and by being transparent on issues such as sustainability and product provenance, we are also ensuring that we help to stimulate demand which will support cocoa farmers and provide long term viability to the industry”Click to EnlargeOlam Cocoa is an integrated cocoa business that supplies cocoa beans and cocoa products. Olam Cocoa is the leading originator of cocoa beans, a globally leading cocoa processor, and the world’s foremost, focused supplier of cocoa beans and cocoa products.Cocoa beans are sourced from all major origins across Africa, Asia and South America, and Olam Cocoa’s portfolio of respected brands is spearheaded by the iconic deZaan, with its heritage of more than 100 years of excellence, as well as African origin brand Unicao, South American origin brand Joanes, the well-established Macao cocoa powders and Britannia specialty fats brands, and the recently launched Huysman cocoa powder brand. Olam Cocoa has processing, refining and milling presence in the main cocoa producing countries, as well as in, or adjacent to, primary consumption markets in Europe, USA, Canada and Asia.Alongside a substantial operational infrastructure, Olam Cocoa says it recognizes the clear responsibility to operate sustainably and Grow Responsibly. “As the world’s leading supplier of sustainable cocoa, Olam Cocoa is accelerating progress towards the goal of 100% sustainably sourced cocoa by 2020,” the company writes.
Swiss milk processor and dairy products company Emmi is strengthening its position in South America with the acquisition of a 40% stake in Brazil’s Laticínios Porto Alegre.Based in Ponte Nova in the state of Minas Gerais, the company is among the five largest dairies in its main market of Minas Gerais in milk collection, with strong positions in the cheese, fresh cheese, UHT milk, butter and whey powder product categories.As part of its international program of growth, Emmi says the deal in Brazil bolsters its presence in a location which has been on the company’s “watch list” for several years. It already has a long standing presence in the market as a leading exporter of cheese fondue and raw milk cheeses from Switzerland, but wants to build on that through organic growth as well as acquisitions.The stake in Laticínios Porto Alegre Indústria e Comércio S/A not only strengthens Emmi’s position in South America, it creates a second strong local foothold alongside Chile. The remaining 60% holding in the company, which was founded in 1991, will be retained by brothers José Afonso and company CEO João Lúcio Barreto Carneiro who will help to drive forward the future development of the company together with Emmi.“Laticínios Porto Alegre is a healthy company that has also done an excellent job in the recent years of economic difficulty. Its strong position provides Emmi the possibility of complementing its product portfolio with innovative product and marketing concepts, thereby creating additional opportunities in a market with a great deal of potential over the long term,” says Emmi’s CEO Urs Riedener.Porto Alegre is well established with a modern production and distribution infrastructure. Over the past few years, it has developed extremely well, with growth rates that have outperformed the market. This was due in part to the excellent raw milk base of the company, which has been built up through successful cooperation with milk producers.Last year the company generated sales of approximately BRL 500 million (around US$157 million) and employed 1,000 people. Its head office and one production facility are located in Ponte Nova, with another plant in Mutum. Both locations are just a few hundred kilometers from São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. The company also recently purchased production infrastructure in Barbacena to focus on the manufacturing of fresh cheese products.The product portfolio has for some time been changing from basic products towards more premium dairy specialities, an area in which the collaboration with Emmi will create further opportunities. Laticínios Porto Alegre is the fifth largest dairy in its main market of Minas Gerais, with strong positions in traditional natural cheese, mozzarella and requeijão (fresh cheese), UHT milk and butter. It also manufactures whey powder for the Brazilian Food Industry.Brazil officially enter the Recession in 2014 and several years of economic difficulties have followed. However, some analysts says the country’s economy is now stabilizing as inflation has declined in recent months and the Brazilian Real is recovering.Emmi considers Brazil as the most important dairy market in Latin America with more than 34 billion kg of milk produced which ranks it among the largest global milk producers.“Emmi’s engagement offers a good opportunity to be present in this long-term attractive market,” adds the company.In 2005, Emmi AG acquired Italian dairy Trentinalatte SpA, a group specializing in yogurt related food and drinks, in 2010, it acquired German dairy company Onken and in  2016, it acquired American cheese manufacturer Cowgirl Creamery.And in January, Emmi signed a contract for the sale of Italian Fresh Foods SpA (IFF) in Lasnigo/Como, Italy. IFF produces and distributes high-quality dessert specialties. The acquisition also strengthens Emmi’s position in the Italian specialty market and in an attractive niche market.
Senomyx, Inc., a leading company using proprietary taste science technologies to discover, develop, and commercialize novel flavor ingredients and natural high intensity sweeteners has reported that commercial revenues increased 26% and direct sales increased 250% over the first quarter of 2016."Senomyx is off to a good start in 2017," stated John Poyhonen, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company. "We exceeded our financial guidance for the first quarter of 2017 and are well-positioned to meet key commercial revenue, business development and R&D goals. During the first quarter, we grew direct sales to well over twice that of our previous highest quarter, we advanced business development discussions on siratose, our lead natural high intensity sweetener, and we received regulatory authorization to commercialize a new cooling flavor ingredient."In March, the Company introduced its new natural high intensity sweetener under the common or usual name of siratose and made important disclosures related to the plant source, the expected manufacturing process and anticipated development timeline for siratose. The siratose disclosures have facilitated the Company's pursuit of new non-exclusive collaborative relationships for its natural sweet taste program that maximize the commercial potential and provide its collaborators with access to siratose and future natural product discoveries. "We have built a pipeline of about 20 excellent collaboration candidates and we remain confident in our ability to begin adding collaborators to our syndicate during 2017," stated Poyhonen."On the development front, our newest cooling flavor ingredient, Coolmyx™ CL19, was determined Generally Recognized As Safe (GRAS) by the Expert Panel of the Flavor and Extract Manufacturers Association of the United States (FEMA) during the first quarter. The GRAS determination allows Senomyx to pursue commercialization in the U.S. and a number of other countries. Coolmyx CL19 provides a clean, long lasting cooling taste profile and we will initially pursue beverages, confectionary, and oral healthcare products as the target market. Third parties are currently evaluating this cooling flavor and we are considering a broad range of strategic options for commercialization," Poyhonen concluded."Direct sales of Senomyx's Complimyx flavor ingredient offerings grew to record levels during the first quarter with revenues increasing by over 250% compared to the same quarter of the prior year," stated Sharon Wicker, Senior Vice President and Chief Commercial Development Officer. "We continue to earn new business with world-class flavor house customers and their forecasts for future use of our flavor ingredients is promising. During the first quarter, we announced that we had filled a newly created position, senior director of sales, to lead our sales organization in the field and we have added an experienced flavor ingredient broker with a proven track record to represent Senomyx in Asia and Oceania. We remain enthusiastic about the positive impact we anticipate these steps will have on our direct sales efforts going forward."Commercial revenues increased 26% to $2.6 million in the first quarter ended March 31, 2017. This improvement primarily resulted from higher direct sales of flavor ingredients to flavor houses and higher royalties from sweet taste boosting ingredients. These increases were partially offset by a $500,000 one-time commercial milestone earned in the first quarter of 2016 related to the cooling taste program.Development revenues decreased to $1.8 million in the first quarter ended March 31, 2017. This decrease was primarily due to the July 2016 contractual conclusion of the research and development funding period under the sweet taste program collaboration with Firmenich.Research, development and patent expenses decreased $1 million to $4.4 million for the first quarter ended March 31, 2017. The reduction in expenses is primarily due to lower personnel-related expenses partially offset by higher outsourced development activities associated with Sweetmyx® FS22, the Company's next generation sweet taste booster. Selling, general and administration expenses were consistent with prior year at $3.1 million for the first quarter ended March 31, 2017. Included in these first quarter 2017 R&D and SG&A expenses were approximately $800,000 in non-cash, stock-based compensation expenses.The net loss for the first quarter 2017 was $3.4 million or $0.07 per share.Senomyx ended the first quarter 2017 with no debt and $10.1 million in cash. Accounts payable decreased by $1.4 million during the first quarter. At the end of the first quarter, the Company had $5.5 million in accounts receivable, of which $5.0 million is anticipated to be received during the second quarter. In addition to these accounts receivable amounts, the Company is currently scheduled to receive $15.8 million in committed development funding in the future.For the second quarter of 2017, the Company expects revenues to be at least $4.6 million, of which at least $2.7 million are commercial revenues; and a net loss not to exceed $3.3 million or $0.07 per share.
As a first step to realizing the ambition of the Quadram Institute, the Institute of Food Research (IFR) has realigned its science strategy to deliver to the vision of the new Institute. In preparation for the full opening of the Quadram Institute in 2018, IFR will transition into Quadram Institute Bioscience today (April 28, 2017). Its company number remains the same as does the registered office until it moves to the new building mid-2018.The Quadram Institute will be at the forefront of a new interface between food science, gut biology and health, developing solutions to worldwide challenges in food-related disease and human health. It will bring together research teams from the Institute of Food Research, the Norfolk and Norwich University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust (NNUH) and the University of East Anglia, as well as NNUH’s regional gastrointestinal endoscopy unit.The new institute is being funded by these partners and the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC). The Quadram Institute will have the capacity for 300 research staff with a further 100 staff supporting one of Europe’s largest endoscopy facilities.It will be engaged in fundamental and translational food and health research, alongside clinical studies, endoscopy and industry, working together to become a leading international hub for food and health research. It will combine scientific excellence and clinical expertise, delivering impacts on patient care and accelerating innovation.The Quadram Institute will maximise the impact of the unique world-class bioscience cluster based at the Norwich Research Park, including the excellent plant and microbial science at the John Innes Centre and computational science and sequencing expertise at the Earlham Institute.
The launch of a new five-step guide will aim to help UK Food and drink companies accelerate their export journey with specialized help and advice. Currently only one in five of the UK's manufacturers export which presents a massive untapped opportunity for the industry.“Food and drink exporting – Five steps to success” has been developed by the Food and Drink Federation (FDF) and Food and Drink Exporters Association (FDEA).The first version of the guide launched in April 2016 was very well received by industry. More than 2,000 copies have been distributed to UK businesses and it has been downloaded more than 3,500 times.“We hope that our guide will enable more of the UK's 6,800 food and drink producers to grow their businesses by becoming successful exporters,” said Angela Coleshill, Competitiveness Director at FDF.“Manufacturers in competing nations typically benefit from more generous government export support than those in the UK, so it is essential that organisations such as FDF and FDEA work together to help unlock our industry's huge potential.”The guide encourages current and would-be exporters to think about the core elements of the export process, answering key questions, and providing useful tips and relevant contacts.The launch comes as the UK makes plans to leave the European Union, and FDF state that manufacturers must be prepared if they are to take advantage of new opportunities and sell quality UK-produced food and drink overseas.UK food and drink exports reached a record £20bn in 2016, while branded food and drink exports grew 11.5% to £5.2bn.FDF has set an ambition to help grow exports of UK branded goods by a third by 2020 to more than £6bn.In addition to the new guide, FDF has encouraged the Government to work with industry to scale-up its provision of specialist food and drink export support by putting in place a one-stop shop to support small and medium-sized exporters.“While our future trading terms with the EU are unclear, now is the time for British businesses to embrace new opportunities in non-EU countries and take advantage of rising demand to make inroads into new markets.” John Whitehead OBE, Director of FDEA, said.“There's great interest across the globe in UK food and drink, which continues to possess a reputation for real quality.”“We'd like to see more manufacturers look beyond their domestic market and take advantage of these opportunities, which can really help businesses grow.”The guide has also received praise from members of parliament, with Angus MacNeil MP, saying, "The guide from the Food & Drink Federation and the Food & Drink Exporters Association provides invaluable advice and support that will help more food and drink manufacturers sell their products internationally.”“As Chair of the International Trade Committee, I value their input, knowledge and understanding of overseas markets.”
Australians have been waiting five years for the federal government to hatch a plan on free range eggs – but the result has been branded a farce by a consumer advocacy group as it relaxes the rules for egg producers who will be able to advertise eggs as “free range” under a standard that crams hens closer together and does not even decree for the birds to go outside.But despite the heavy criticism, Australia’s Small Business Minister Michael McCormack insists that consumers will now have the information they need to make informed choices when it comes to purchasing free-range eggs, “thanks to a new information standard registered under the Australian Consumer Law.”“I want to ensure Australians are fully informed when they purchase products. The new free-range egg labeling information standard gives Australians more information about the eggs on supermarket shelves, so they can make an informed choice when choosing between available brands,” he says.“The new standard will also remove uncertainty faced by producers who choose to label their eggs free-range.”Minister McCormack said the new standard was reached after many months of consultation with industry and consumer groups, with hundreds of submissions received during public consultations.“Eggs are a staple ingredient in the average family’s weekly grocery basket. Prices widely vary depending on a number of factors including the use of a free-range label.“The information standard will require eggs labeled as free-range to have been laid by hens that had meaningful and regular access to the outdoors and with an outdoor stocking density of 10,000 hens, or less, per hectare.“The stocking density will need to be prominently displayed on the packaging to allow easy comparison between different eggs on supermarket shelves. While a number of stakeholders argued for this stocking density to be lower, my decision takes into consideration the views of consumers, advocacy groups and industry, and provides a sensible balance with a focus on informing consumers – so they can make the choice that’s right for their needs.”Free-Range FarceConsumer advocacy group CHOICE has branded the move a “free range farce”, claiming its shoppers who will lose out in the new free range egg standard.Tom Godfrey, from CHOICE, says consumers will be paying for eggs that don't meet their understanding of free range."It's extremely disappointing that the new standard on free range eggs locks in a cap that is more than six times the previous voluntary limit of 1,500 hens per hectare.  says Godfrey."We believe the new standard fails to meet consumers' understanding of what free range actually means."Godfrey adds that while stocking densities need to be printed on the pack, there is no requirement for information to be displayed consistently, or in a way that would help consumers compare free range egg products.Free Range Finally UnscrambledMeanwhile the Egg Farmers of Australia (EFA) has welcomed the finalization of the Free-Range Labeling Information Standard, claiming that it will bring “simplicity and clarity” to the term free range, while also ensuring that when consumers choose to buy free range they will know exactly what they are getting.“Under the new standard, every farmer must give their hens meaningful and regular access to an outdoor range. Any hen who wants to go outdoors will be able to do so, if she chooses to. People will also be able to see on egg cartons how many hens per hectare there are on the farm. Displaying stock density information on egg cartons gives the choice to consumers,” says John Dunn, CEO, Egg Farmers of Australia.“This is a win for consumers and a win for farmers. Consumers will now have confidence that when they buy free-range that’s what they’re getting. They’ll also have more choice with stocking density to be displayed on carton.”“After years of uncertainty, farmers will have the confidence to invest in new free range farming facilities and technologies, such as new environmental controls in sheds to keep hens cool during summer and enrichments to range areas.”“EFA supports consumers in their right to choose which type of eggs they want to buy – whether that be from free range, barn or caged hens. We look forward to the new labeling standards being implemented.”
Olam Cocoa has marked the opening of its latest Cocoa Innovation Centre (CIC) in Willowbrook, Illinois, just outside of Chicago. The new facility will provide important innovation capabilities to support Olam Cocoa’s North American customers.The opening of this latest CIC, one of six globally, along with Centres in Brazil, Netherlands, Spain, Singapore and UK, will assist customers in the refinement and reformulation of existing recipes, provide proof of concept opportunities, and aid in the development of new products across such diverse application categories as beverages, cereals, chocolate confectionery, dairy, biscuits and bakery, and ice cream.Click to EnlargeRinus Heemskerk, Global Head of Product Development and Innovation noted that: “The facility will also host regular educational and application-specific seminars as part of a range of services designed to greatly reduce product development cycle timelines and help customers keep pace with changing consumer tastes and market trends.”Olam Cocoa is also unveiling the new branding look of its portfolio of cocoa product brands, deZaan, Unicao, Macao, and Joanes, as well as announcing the launch of a completely new cocoa product brand for the North American and Asia Pacific markets, Huysman. As a region-specific brand born out of the heritage of deZaan, starting in Q3 2017, Huysman will offer a focused selection of value driven, best-in-class cocoa powders to these markets.Gerard A Manley, CEO of Olam Cocoa, added: “By investing in modern facilities like Willowbrook we support our customers to satisfy consumer needs, and by being transparent on issues such as sustainability and product provenance, we are also ensuring that we help to stimulate demand which will support cocoa farmers and provide long term viability to the industry”Click to EnlargeOlam Cocoa is an integrated cocoa business that supplies cocoa beans and cocoa products. Olam Cocoa is the leading originator of cocoa beans, a globally leading cocoa processor, and the world’s foremost, focused supplier of cocoa beans and cocoa products.Cocoa beans are sourced from all major origins across Africa, Asia and South America, and Olam Cocoa’s portfolio of respected brands is spearheaded by the iconic deZaan, with its heritage of more than 100 years of excellence, as well as African origin brand Unicao, South American origin brand Joanes, the well-established Macao cocoa powders and Britannia specialty fats brands, and the recently launched Huysman cocoa powder brand. Olam Cocoa has processing, refining and milling presence in the main cocoa producing countries, as well as in, or adjacent to, primary consumption markets in Europe, USA, Canada and Asia.Alongside a substantial operational infrastructure, Olam Cocoa says it recognizes the clear responsibility to operate sustainably and Grow Responsibly. “As the world’s leading supplier of sustainable cocoa, Olam Cocoa is accelerating progress towards the goal of 100% sustainably sourced cocoa by 2020,” the company writes.
Swiss milk processor and dairy products company Emmi is strengthening its position in South America with the acquisition of a 40% stake in Brazil’s Laticínios Porto Alegre.Based in Ponte Nova in the state of Minas Gerais, the company is among the five largest dairies in its main market of Minas Gerais in milk collection, with strong positions in the cheese, fresh cheese, UHT milk, butter and whey powder product categories.As part of its international program of growth, Emmi says the deal in Brazil bolsters its presence in a location which has been on the company’s “watch list” for several years. It already has a long standing presence in the market as a leading exporter of cheese fondue and raw milk cheeses from Switzerland, but wants to build on that through organic growth as well as acquisitions.The stake in Laticínios Porto Alegre Indústria e Comércio S/A not only strengthens Emmi’s position in South America, it creates a second strong local foothold alongside Chile. The remaining 60% holding in the company, which was founded in 1991, will be retained by brothers José Afonso and company CEO João Lúcio Barreto Carneiro who will help to drive forward the future development of the company together with Emmi.“Laticínios Porto Alegre is a healthy company that has also done an excellent job in the recent years of economic difficulty. Its strong position provides Emmi the possibility of complementing its product portfolio with innovative product and marketing concepts, thereby creating additional opportunities in a market with a great deal of potential over the long term,” says Emmi’s CEO Urs Riedener.Porto Alegre is well established with a modern production and distribution infrastructure. Over the past few years, it has developed extremely well, with growth rates that have outperformed the market. This was due in part to the excellent raw milk base of the company, which has been built up through successful cooperation with milk producers.Last year the company generated sales of approximately BRL 500 million (around US$157 million) and employed 1,000 people. Its head office and one production facility are located in Ponte Nova, with another plant in Mutum. Both locations are just a few hundred kilometers from São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. The company also recently purchased production infrastructure in Barbacena to focus on the manufacturing of fresh cheese products.The product portfolio has for some time been changing from basic products towards more premium dairy specialities, an area in which the collaboration with Emmi will create further opportunities. Laticínios Porto Alegre is the fifth largest dairy in its main market of Minas Gerais, with strong positions in traditional natural cheese, mozzarella and requeijão (fresh cheese), UHT milk and butter. It also manufactures whey powder for the Brazilian Food Industry.Brazil officially enter the Recession in 2014 and several years of economic difficulties have followed. However, some analysts says the country’s economy is now stabilizing as inflation has declined in recent months and the Brazilian Real is recovering.Emmi considers Brazil as the most important dairy market in Latin America with more than 34 billion kg of milk produced which ranks it among the largest global milk producers.“Emmi’s engagement offers a good opportunity to be present in this long-term attractive market,” adds the company.In 2005, Emmi AG acquired Italian dairy Trentinalatte SpA, a group specializing in yogurt related food and drinks, in 2010, it acquired German dairy company Onken and in  2016, it acquired American cheese manufacturer Cowgirl Creamery.And in January, Emmi signed a contract for the sale of Italian Fresh Foods SpA (IFF) in Lasnigo/Como, Italy. IFF produces and distributes high-quality dessert specialties. The acquisition also strengthens Emmi’s position in the Italian specialty market and in an attractive niche market.
Senomyx, Inc., a leading company using proprietary taste science technologies to discover, develop, and commercialize novel flavor ingredients and natural high intensity sweeteners has reported that commercial revenues increased 26% and direct sales increased 250% over the first quarter of 2016."Senomyx is off to a good start in 2017," stated John Poyhonen, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company. "We exceeded our financial guidance for the first quarter of 2017 and are well-positioned to meet key commercial revenue, business development and R&D goals. During the first quarter, we grew direct sales to well over twice that of our previous highest quarter, we advanced business development discussions on siratose, our lead natural high intensity sweetener, and we received regulatory authorization to commercialize a new cooling flavor ingredient."In March, the Company introduced its new natural high intensity sweetener under the common or usual name of siratose and made important disclosures related to the plant source, the expected manufacturing process and anticipated development timeline for siratose. The siratose disclosures have facilitated the Company's pursuit of new non-exclusive collaborative relationships for its natural sweet taste program that maximize the commercial potential and provide its collaborators with access to siratose and future natural product discoveries. "We have built a pipeline of about 20 excellent collaboration candidates and we remain confident in our ability to begin adding collaborators to our syndicate during 2017," stated Poyhonen."On the development front, our newest cooling flavor ingredient, Coolmyx™ CL19, was determined Generally Recognized As Safe (GRAS) by the Expert Panel of the Flavor and Extract Manufacturers Association of the United States (FEMA) during the first quarter. The GRAS determination allows Senomyx to pursue commercialization in the U.S. and a number of other countries. Coolmyx CL19 provides a clean, long lasting cooling taste profile and we will initially pursue beverages, confectionary, and oral healthcare products as the target market. Third parties are currently evaluating this cooling flavor and we are considering a broad range of strategic options for commercialization," Poyhonen concluded."Direct sales of Senomyx's Complimyx flavor ingredient offerings grew to record levels during the first quarter with revenues increasing by over 250% compared to the same quarter of the prior year," stated Sharon Wicker, Senior Vice President and Chief Commercial Development Officer. "We continue to earn new business with world-class flavor house customers and their forecasts for future use of our flavor ingredients is promising. During the first quarter, we announced that we had filled a newly created position, senior director of sales, to lead our sales organization in the field and we have added an experienced flavor ingredient broker with a proven track record to represent Senomyx in Asia and Oceania. We remain enthusiastic about the positive impact we anticipate these steps will have on our direct sales efforts going forward."Commercial revenues increased 26% to $2.6 million in the first quarter ended March 31, 2017. This improvement primarily resulted from higher direct sales of flavor ingredients to flavor houses and higher royalties from sweet taste boosting ingredients. These increases were partially offset by a $500,000 one-time commercial milestone earned in the first quarter of 2016 related to the cooling taste program.Development revenues decreased to $1.8 million in the first quarter ended March 31, 2017. This decrease was primarily due to the July 2016 contractual conclusion of the research and development funding period under the sweet taste program collaboration with Firmenich.Research, development and patent expenses decreased $1 million to $4.4 million for the first quarter ended March 31, 2017. The reduction in expenses is primarily due to lower personnel-related expenses partially offset by higher outsourced development activities associated with Sweetmyx® FS22, the Company's next generation sweet taste booster. Selling, general and administration expenses were consistent with prior year at $3.1 million for the first quarter ended March 31, 2017. Included in these first quarter 2017 R&D and SG&A expenses were approximately $800,000 in non-cash, stock-based compensation expenses.The net loss for the first quarter 2017 was $3.4 million or $0.07 per share.Senomyx ended the first quarter 2017 with no debt and $10.1 million in cash. Accounts payable decreased by $1.4 million during the first quarter. At the end of the first quarter, the Company had $5.5 million in accounts receivable, of which $5.0 million is anticipated to be received during the second quarter. In addition to these accounts receivable amounts, the Company is currently scheduled to receive $15.8 million in committed development funding in the future.For the second quarter of 2017, the Company expects revenues to be at least $4.6 million, of which at least $2.7 million are commercial revenues; and a net loss not to exceed $3.3 million or $0.07 per share.
As a first step to realizing the ambition of the Quadram Institute, the Institute of Food Research (IFR) has realigned its science strategy to deliver to the vision of the new Institute. In preparation for the full opening of the Quadram Institute in 2018, IFR will transition into Quadram Institute Bioscience today (April 28, 2017). Its company number remains the same as does the registered office until it moves to the new building mid-2018.The Quadram Institute will be at the forefront of a new interface between food science, gut biology and health, developing solutions to worldwide challenges in food-related disease and human health. It will bring together research teams from the Institute of Food Research, the Norfolk and Norwich University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust (NNUH) and the University of East Anglia, as well as NNUH’s regional gastrointestinal endoscopy unit.The new institute is being funded by these partners and the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC). The Quadram Institute will have the capacity for 300 research staff with a further 100 staff supporting one of Europe’s largest endoscopy facilities.It will be engaged in fundamental and translational food and health research, alongside clinical studies, endoscopy and industry, working together to become a leading international hub for food and health research. It will combine scientific excellence and clinical expertise, delivering impacts on patient care and accelerating innovation.The Quadram Institute will maximise the impact of the unique world-class bioscience cluster based at the Norwich Research Park, including the excellent plant and microbial science at the John Innes Centre and computational science and sequencing expertise at the Earlham Institute.
The launch of a new five-step guide will aim to help UK Food and drink companies accelerate their export journey with specialized help and advice. Currently only one in five of the UK's manufacturers export which presents a massive untapped opportunity for the industry.“Food and drink exporting – Five steps to success” has been developed by the Food and Drink Federation (FDF) and Food and Drink Exporters Association (FDEA).The first version of the guide launched in April 2016 was very well received by industry. More than 2,000 copies have been distributed to UK businesses and it has been downloaded more than 3,500 times.“We hope that our guide will enable more of the UK's 6,800 food and drink producers to grow their businesses by becoming successful exporters,” said Angela Coleshill, Competitiveness Director at FDF.“Manufacturers in competing nations typically benefit from more generous government export support than those in the UK, so it is essential that organisations such as FDF and FDEA work together to help unlock our industry's huge potential.”The guide encourages current and would-be exporters to think about the core elements of the export process, answering key questions, and providing useful tips and relevant contacts.The launch comes as the UK makes plans to leave the European Union, and FDF state that manufacturers must be prepared if they are to take advantage of new opportunities and sell quality UK-produced food and drink overseas.UK food and drink exports reached a record £20bn in 2016, while branded food and drink exports grew 11.5% to £5.2bn.FDF has set an ambition to help grow exports of UK branded goods by a third by 2020 to more than £6bn.In addition to the new guide, FDF has encouraged the Government to work with industry to scale-up its provision of specialist food and drink export support by putting in place a one-stop shop to support small and medium-sized exporters.“While our future trading terms with the EU are unclear, now is the time for British businesses to embrace new opportunities in non-EU countries and take advantage of rising demand to make inroads into new markets.” John Whitehead OBE, Director of FDEA, said.“There's great interest across the globe in UK food and drink, which continues to possess a reputation for real quality.”“We'd like to see more manufacturers look beyond their domestic market and take advantage of these opportunities, which can really help businesses grow.”The guide has also received praise from members of parliament, with Angus MacNeil MP, saying, "The guide from the Food & Drink Federation and the Food & Drink Exporters Association provides invaluable advice and support that will help more food and drink manufacturers sell their products internationally.”“As Chair of the International Trade Committee, I value their input, knowledge and understanding of overseas markets.”
The falling demand for fizzy drinks has hit Coca-Cola as the soft drinks giant posts its first quarter results and also announces 1,200 job losses. As global consumers continue to opt out of sugar sweetened soda in favor of healthier choices and a general change in tastes and preferences continues to sweep across many food and drinks sectors, growth is stalling at Coca Cola.In an announcement yesterday (Apr 26), Coca Cola said its global carbonated drink sales fell 1% in the quarter to 31 March, while non-carbonated drinks are driving sales in North America.The job cuts will start to happen in the second half of this year and into 2018.Coca Cola’s position reflects what is happening generally in the soft drinks industry as it comes to terms with slower growth which can then lead onto cost cutting exercises – just like announcing job losses.Coca Cola is increasing its cost-cutting target by US$800m in annualized savings, and expects to save US$3.8bn by 2019.However, company chairman and chief executive Muhtar Kent – who makes way for James Quincey next week – insists that the Q1 performance is what was expected."The first quarter performance was in line with our plan, and we remain on track to deliver our underlying revenue and profit targets for the full year. As anticipated, revenues in the quarter were adversely impacted by two fewer days and the shift of the Easter holiday,” he says.“Most importantly, we continue to execute against the long-term strategic transformation plan for the Company – a plan that I am confident will deliver even greater shareowner and stakeholder value in the years to come.""Next week I will proudly hand over the CEO reins to James Quincey with full confidence that he will complete the Company's transformation and lead our aggressive growth agenda. His vision of accelerating The Coca-Cola Company's evolution into a total beverage business with a focus on driving sustainable growth across a broad portfolio is exciting for all stakeholders, and he has my full support," Kent continued.President and Chief Operating Officer James Quincey said how Coca Cola is evolving to make changes that will result in a more “consumer-centric” portfolio that keeps pace with changing taste and preferences which primarily means cutting out or reducing sugar.“Importantly, these portfolio changes will help our consumers moderate the amount of added sugar they consume. In addition, as we approach the end of our refranchising and implement our new, more agile operating model, we are expanding our productivity program.”“Our revamped portfolio, a stronger global bottling system, and a leaner enterprise structure will allow us to capture an increasing share of the vibrant value growth available in the beverage industry and to deliver value for our shareowners.”“It will be an honor and a privilege to lead the organization as CEO, and I look forward to working with our people around the world to accelerate our growth."Other key results for the first quarter include Coca Cola’s net revenues declining 11%, reflecting unfavorable impacts from structural changes of 10% and foreign currency of 1%, while organic revenues (Non-GAAP) were even, which included the impact of two fewer days in the reporting calendar and the shift of the Easter holiday.Meanwhile, price/mix grew 3% with balanced contribution across the operating segments and the operating margin and comparable currency neutral operating margin (Non-GAAP) expanded more than 90 basis points and more than 220 basis points respectively.Coca Cola also reported EPS of US$0.27 and Comparable EPS (Non-GAAP) of $0.43 and says it is on track to deliver full year organic revenue (Non-GAAP) and comparable EPS (Non-GAAP) targets.
The market for milk ingredients will continue its volume growth. A better balance between supply and demand over the last year has improved prices, despite the build-up of EU intervention stocks in 2016. Milk supply reductions will help the market and provide the stimuli for future volume and value growth. This is according to a new report on milk ingredients from 3A Business Consulting, entitled “The World Market for Milk Ingredients 2016-2020.”The world market for milk ingredients continues to grow by 3% annually in volume terms, whereas the value has changed significantly given the price volatility over the period 2014-2017. However, the prices of the higher added-value milk ingredients, e.g. milk protein isolates and milk protein hydrolysates, have not shown the same volatility as the commodities whole milk powder and skim milk powder. Currently, it is estimated that the world market for milk ingredients is worth approx. USD 32 billion and amounts to more than 10.5 million MT in 2016. Whole milk powder and skim milk powder obviously make up the bulk with more than 90% of this volume.“The main drivers for dairy remain intact – the world’s population continues to grow, living standards are improving, dairy consumption is increasing especially in the Asian region, and consumers are increasingly being motivated to buy products from a health and nutrition perspective”, says Tage Affertsholt from 3A Business Consulting.The report provides an overview of the current and expected future global market for milk ingredients. It is global in scope, with a comprehensive regional analysis of the EU, North America, Latin America, Eastern Europe, Asia and Oceania markets. Specifically, the report covers whole and skim milk powders, casein and caseinates, milk protein concentrates, milk protein isolates, total milk proteins, hydrolysed milk proteins, micellar casein, milk permeate powder, and fat-filled milk powder.Asia including China is the single major dairy market for whole milk power and skim milk powder in the world, however also rapidly catching up with the EU and the US regarding casein/caseinates and milk protein concentrates. Consumption of real high-end milk proteins is still dominated by the EU and the US.Production of milk powders is huge in Oceania, EU and US but for whole milk powder Asia, particularly with China and India, is a major producer. Casein/caseinates and milk protein production is really the domain of Oceania, the EU and the US.Oceania and in particular New Zealand is playing the leading role in export trade followed by EU and US. For the traditional milk powders, Asia and Middle East/Africa are the leading importing regions.The April/May issue ofThe World of Food Ingredientsfeatures an article co-written by Tage Affertsholt of 3A Business Consulting, entitled “Special Nutrition Needs Fuel Clinical Innovation,” which looks at market opportunities for the three primary market segments of clinical nutrition.
PontNutrition & Health has launched its new SUPRO XT55 Isolated Soy Protein, designed specifically to improve the profitability of ready-to-drink, high protein beverages by helping beverage manufacturers more effectively manage protein costs. “Soy protein has always been considered an economic alternative to dairy proteins, providing direct cost savings as well as more stable pricing over time. Now it’s even more relevant as plant proteins keep growing in popularity and demand,” says Jean Heggie, strategic marketing lead,DuPontNutrition & Health.“In beverages, blending dairy and soy proteins has become a popular formulation strategy for controlling costs, while driving better flavor profiles. However, when working with certain ready-to-drink (RTD) beverage formulas, traditional soy proteins would build too much viscosity or tend to be less stable over time limiting how much dairy protein we could effectively replace.  New SUPRO XT55 addresses those barriers,” Heggie says.With SUPRO XT55, it is now possible to replace up to 50 percent of the dairy protein in beverage formulations without compromising sensory performance or protein nutrition, the company reports. It provides the perfect balance of viscosity and protein stability, while delivering cost savings and exceptional flavor performance. Like all DuPont SUPRO Proteins, SUPRO XT 55 is a high-quality, sustainable source of plant-based protein, with all the associated nutrition and health benefits of soy protein.For years, beverage manufacturers have relied on DuPont to generate significant costs savings for their brands, while maintaining or improving flavor performance. “SUPRO XT 55 addresses the functional limitations of previous soy protein technologies by delivering lower viscosity and improved protein stability,” says Heggie. “With this new innovation, we can replace even greater levels of dairy proteins in these formulas for cost advantage, while delivering great-tasting, nutritious, high-protein beverages to the market.”With a Protein Digestibility-Corrected Amino Acid Score (PDCAAS) of 1.0, SUPRO XT 55 is equivalent in protein quality to dairy protein. Therefore, when replacing dairy, it will have no impact on the protein quality of the finished formula. Like other SUPRO Proteins, it is supported by years of clinical research, demonstrating its value for heart health, muscle building and maintenance, weight management and healthy growth and development.“SUPRO XT 55 expands the options beverage manufacturers have to control protein costs, while maintaining or improving flavor profiles,” explains Heggie. “Our sensory research proves that dairy and soy blends drive better flavor. SUPRO XT 55 now gives us a wider range of options to create protein systems for our customers that optimize flavor, cost and nutrition.”
The Hershey Company yesterday announced its first quarter sales and earnings, with consolidated net sales reaching US$1,879.7 million compared with US$1,828.8 million for the first quarter of 2016 and reported net income reaching US$125 million, compared with US$229.8 million for the comparable period last year. The company noted that retail sales had been impacted by the timing of Easter, which this year was three weeks later than last year."Net sales increased 2.8%, slightly less than our forecast and reflective of the broader soft US food-industry retail trends to start the year. Gross margin expansion was solid, which contributed to strong operating profit growth. First quarter US retail takeaway was primarily impacted by the timing of Easter, however, our market share gains were solid. The launch of Hershey's Cookie Layer Crunch bars got off to a good start and we're following that up with the roll out of Hershey's Crunchers candy and Reese's Crunchy Cookie Cups. Importantly, while preliminary, our Easter sell through is in line with our estimate and we anticipate Hershey US candy, mint and gum (CMG) April year-to-date retail takeaway will be about 2.5%," says Michele Buck, President and Chief Executive Officer, The Hershey Company.For the first quarter of 2017, reported gross margin was 48.2% versus 44.7% in the first quarter of 2016. Meanwhile, reported operating profit was US$191.9 million, a decline of 43.5% versus the same period in 2016, resulting in operating profit margin of 10.2%, according to the company’s report.The report indicated that consolidated net sales were US$1,879.7 million in the first quarter of 2017, an increase of 2.8% versus the first quarter of 2016. Excluding favorable foreign currency translation, a 0.1 point benefit, net sales increased 2.7% versus the year ago period. Net price realization was a 2.0 point benefit due to lower levels of trade. Net volume increased 0.7 points, including a contribution from the barkTHINS brand acquisition of 0.9 points.Adjusted gross margin was 47.5% in the first quarter of 2017 compared to 46.8% in the first quarter of 2016. The 70 basis point increase was primarily driven by favorable trade, supply chain productivity and cost saving initiatives and lower input costs, partially offset by other higher supply chain costs."In 2017, we remain focused on driving our North America core brands forward and achieving trial and repeat targets related to the launches of Hershey's Cookie Layer Crunch bars, Reese's and Hershey's Crunchers candy and Reese's Crunchy Cookie Cups," Buck says."Additionally, the branded snack mix and snack bites products that launched last year continue to do well, enabling us to expand our breadth across the snack wheel and capture new usage occasions. We anticipate that our innovation, as well as our consumer marketing plans, will enable us to build on our first-quarter US CMG market share gains. April year-to-date marketplace performance, driven by our seasonal business, is tracking in line with our estimates,” Buck says.Non-seasonal US CMG trends are expected to improve over the remainder of the year, Bucks says, although the growth rate is expected to be slightly lower than the company had previously forecast.“Additionally, macroeconomic challenges persist in China and we expect net sales for the full year to be lower there than 2016. Therefore, we estimate that full-year 2017 net sales growth will most likely be around the low end of our 2.0% to 3.0% outlook, including a net benefit from acquisitions of about 0.5 points. We expect the impact of foreign currency exchange rates to be minimal versus our previous estimate of a 0.25 point headwind,” Buck says."Our brands typically respond positively to marketplace investments and we continue to expect that advertising and related consumer marketing expense, as well as selling, general and administrative costs, will increase for the full year 2017 versus 2016. We believe these investments in marketing, technology, IT capabilities and analytic approaches will be enablers of profitable growth. Additionally, the company anticipates its effective tax rate will be slightly lower than its original forecast,” Buck adds. “As a result, the company expects the full year increase in adjusted earnings per share-diluted to be around the high end of its outlook of US$4.72 to US$4.81, a 7% to 9% increase versus last year."Hershey's North America first quarter net sales increased 2.7% versus the same period last year, to US$1,677.1 million. Volume was a 0.3 point contribution to sales growth driven by seasonal growth and, as anticipated, net price realization was a 1.2 point benefit due to lower direct trade, the company reported, adding that the barkTHINS brand acquisition and foreign currency exchange rates were a 1.0 and 0.2 point benefit, respectively.North America segment income, including candy, mint, gum, salty snacks, snack bars, meat snacks and grocery items, increased 4.5% to US$553.1 million in the first quarter, compared to US$529.4 million in last year’s first quarter. This increase in segment income was driven by a gross profit increase of about 3.5% versus the first quarter of 2016, partially offset by higher levels of selling expense, investments in greater go-to-market capabilities and increased depreciation and amortization.First quarter net sales for Hershey's International and Other segment increased 3.7% to US$202.5 million. Net price realization was an 8.7 point benefit and volume declined by 4.5 points. Excluding the 0.5 point impact of unfavorable foreign exchange rates, net sales increased 4.2%. Constant currency net sales growth in Mexico, Brazil and India was about 15%. China net sales increased mid-single digits on a percentage basis versus last year. The increase was driven by lower direct trade expense as gross sales declined versus the first quarter of 2016. Retail sales in the China chocolate category were about the same in the first quarter of 2017 as last year.International and Other segment income of US$1.7 million compares to a segment loss of US$13.2 million in the first quarter of 2016. Combined income in Latin America and export markets improved versus the prior year and performance in China benefited primarily from lower direct trade, the company report says.
Ajinomoto’s zero-calorie sweetener, Advantame, has been approved in Canada following the green light already being given by a whole host of other countries. Advantame has a clean, sugar-like taste, functionality and cost effectiveness, and can be used to replace caloric sweeteners and other high-potency sweeteners in foods and beverages while maintaining or enhancing the flavor profile.Advantame is now approved as a sweetener in the US, Mexico, Canada, Japan, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, Israel, Singapore and Turkey and this latest approval brings the number of countries where advantame may be used in foods to 39.As governments around the world encourage populations to reduce their sugar intake, advantame offers excellent sweetening solutions in food formulation. Its clean sweetness allows manufacturers to reduce the amount of sugar in their product without compromising taste.Additionally, advantame blends well with caloric and non-caloric sweeteners, which provides food and beverage companies an opportunity to reduce calories and manage sweetness costs.“We are pleased that Canada has approved advantame and look forward to assisting food and beverage customers in formulating great tasting products while still reducing sugar content,” says Rick Richard, VP of sales and marketing. For companies looking to reduce label impact of the “Added Sugar” line on the new nutritional statement, this sweetener is an excellent solution.
Royal DSM has invited entrepreneurs and innovators looking for financing and partnership to apply to attend an event with top DSM executives to explore business collaborations and investment opportunities. The Innovation Partnering Conference “Connecting Bright Innovations 2017” is to focus on new and innovative products and (bio)technologies that enable better food for everyone. The conference is to be held on 19-20 September at DSM's new Biotechnology Center in Delft, the Netherlands.Click to EnlargeInnovation is what turns DSM's Bright Science into Brighter Living; it is about discovering and integrating the best, most sustainable and commercially viable solutions to meet market needs, drive profitable growth and help towards feeding more than 9 billion people by 2050 in a healthy, tasty and sustainable way.DSM is looking to both finance and partner with innovative entities in this space that want to take their products and solutions to the next level. “Connecting Bright Innovations 2017” represents an opportunity for entrepreneurs and start-up companies to present their product or technology to an organization uniquely positioned to help realize its full commercial potential.This is the fifth such conference hosted by DSM. Previous editions have led to successful financing and partnership deals between DSM and attendees.DSM is seeking entries for innovative technologies and products with both near-term (<3 years to commercialization) and longer-term (>3 years to commercialization) applications in the following areas of interest:Sugar reduction and natural alternative sweetenersBio-preservation solutions for food and beveragesSalt reduction and other natural taste modulation solutionsSolutions to improve digestive health and bio-availabilityFood chain efficiency and food waste reduction solutionsFermentation and enzymatic technologies for new ingredientsThe role of new proteins in healthier, better tasting, more sustainable food products and production systemsClick to EnlargeThe conference will be held at the Rosalind Franklin Biotechnology Center on the DSM site in Delft. The center’s location at the heart of the Biotech Campus Delft allows DSM to rapidly develop and scale up biotechnology solutions for promising new ingredients for customer validation and commercial roll-out. The Biotech Campus Delft, an initiative of DSM Delft, Delft University of Technology, the City of Delft and the Province of South Holland, builds on the location’s existing competences and internationally recognized position as a world leader in biotechnology development. It brings together fundamental science and R&D, applications expertise, piloting and scale-up facilities as well as commercial and market insights and relationships on one location.The April/May edition ofThe World of Food Ingredientsfeatures an interview with Ilona Haaijer, President of DSM Food Specialties, and Gerhard Wagner, Director of the DSM Biotechnology Center. Speaking on DSM new center, Haaijer says, “Technology plays a key role in finding solutions. We need to find a way to feed all the people and a way to do it healthily. We believe passionately in our purpose of enabling better food for everyone. We can apply our science-based competences and creativity to really unlock value for customers and create new innovations.”
Green Plains has entered into an asset purchase agreement to acquire two cattle-feeding operations from Cargill for $36.7 million, excluding working capital. The transaction includes feed yards located in Leoti, Kan. and Yuma, Colo. and will add capacity of 155,000 head to the company's operations. Upon completion of the acquisition, Green Plains Cattle Company will become the fourth largest cattle-feeding operation in the United States with total capacity of more than 255,000 head.As part of the transaction, Green Plains Cattle will also enter into a long-term supply agreement with Cargill Meat Solutions to provide a reliable supply of cattle from the Leoti and Yuma locations, as well as Green Plains' existing feedlot in Kismet, Kan., with appropriate flexibility and economic opportunities for both parties."The growth of Green Plains Cattle achieves one of our strategic initiatives of further diversifying our income streams and investing in adjacent businesses. This purchase also aligns with our overall strategy to meet growing global protein demand in downstream markets that take advantage of our supply chain, production platform and commodity management expertise," commented Todd Becker, president and chief executive officer of Green Plains. "A key component of the acquisition is the long-term agreement with Cargill under which Green Plains Cattle will be a strategic supplier of their beef-packing demand.”Green Plains Cattle Company currently owns a 70,000 head cattle-feeding operation near Kismet, Kan. and a 30,000 head operation near Hereford, Texas."One of the inherent benefits of this transaction is the scale of internal demand for our co-products produced at company-owned ethanol plants. Our cattle business will now consume more than 300 thousand tons of dried distillers grains and 40 million pounds of corn oil annually," Becker added. "The ability to effectively control our feed supply cost provides our cattle business with a strategic operating advantage resulting in more predictable and stable cattle-feeding margins while enhancing Green Plains' knowledge of ration dynamics. Since our entry into cattle feeding a few years ago, the meat and protein market fundamentals have remained favorable and the business has been accretive to Green Plains' earnings.”The Leoti and Yuma cattle-feeding operations consist of approximately 1,900 acres of land, supporting infrastructure and feed storage assets, which are strategically located near major meat packers. The transaction is anticipated to be accretive to 2017 earnings with completion expected in the next 30 days, subject to customary closing conditions and regulatory approvals.
 26 April 2017 – Global nutrition group Glanbia released its first quarter results, with Total Group Revenue increasing 9.6% on a reported basis and 7.7% on a constant currency basis. The company has also signed binding transaction agreements with Glanbia Co-operative Society for the sale of a controlling stake in the Dairy Ireland segment and related associate businesses. Currently, Dairy Ireland is a wholly owned segment of Glanbia and comprises two business units, Glanbia Consumer Foods Ireland and Glanbia Agribusiness.Q1 ResultsThe company’s Q1 revenue increase was driven mainly by improvements in dairy markets compared to the previous year, as well as an increased contribution from its acquisitions.“Glanbia delivered good revenue growth in the first three months of 2017. Glanbia Nutritionals had a good performance and was the main driver of growth. Glanbia Performance Nutrition delivered in line with expectations, as a strong performance in non US markets countered some challenges in the US market,” says Siobhán Talbot, Group Managing Director.Glanbia Performance Nutrition revenues decreased marginally by 0.2%, as a 0.3% increase in pricing and 2.6% growth from the acquisition of Amazing Grass was offset by a 3.1% volume decrease. Glanbia Nutritionals, meanwhile, delivered a good performance in the first three months of 2017 with revenue growth of 10.3%, driven by a price increase of 7.6%, mainly as a result of improved dairy markets, versus prior year and volume growth of 2.7%, primarily driven by Nutritional Solutions.The full year 2017 outlook for Glanbia Nutritionals is good, the company reported, with revenue and EBITA growth “expected to be driven by the continued growth of Nutritional Solutions and improved dairy markets.”Commenting on the company as a whole, Talbot says, “the outlook for the remainder of 2017 is positive and we reiterate our full year guidance of 7% to 10% growth in adjusted earnings per share, constant currency, from the continuing Group (pro-forma) with growth weighted to the second half of the year.”Dairy Ireland DealSubject to certain approvals and conditions, Glanbia Co-op is to acquire a 60% interest in Dairy Ireland for €112 million, together with an amount equal to 100% of the amount of the working capital in Dairy Ireland at Completion, a company release states.If approved by shareholders, Glanbia expects the deal to be completed by July. After completion of the proposed transaction, Glanbia’s Dairy Ireland consumer foods and agribusiness units are to be established as a separate company called Glanbia Ireland.“I’m pleased to announce that Glanbia has signed binding legal agreements, subject to certain approvals and conditions, to sell a 60% interest in Dairy Ireland to Glanbia Co-op. This strategic initiative remains on track to be completed by mid-year. Once completed it is planned to integrate Dairy Ireland with our Associate, Glanbia Ingredients Ireland DAC to form ‘Glanbia Ireland,’ which will be a leading Irish food business. This will bring together Glanbia Group’s Irish dairy and agri-businesses under single ownership and will enable Glanbia to continue to focus on its two growth platforms of Glanbia Performance Nutrition and Glanbia Nutritionals,” Talbot says.Glanbia’s Board has stated that the proposed transaction is in the best interests of Shareholders as a whole as “it will allow Glanbia to continue to focus on its global nutrition strategy through the platforms of Glanbia Performance Nutrition (GPN), Glanbia Nutritionals (GN) and Strategic Joint Ventures for the benefit of all shareholders; and creates an integrated Irish-based business of scale which is the largest dairy processor in Ireland,” among other reasons.By Lucy Gunn
Denmark-based biotechnology company Novozymes has reported overall positive Q1 results with a 3% organic sales growth mainly driven by food & beverages and bioenergy. The company reports that sales and earnings are on track with this “good start to 2017” which has also seen solid progress on Novozymes strategic priorities.EBIT grew by 6%, and the EBIT margin improved by 0.7 percentage points to 27%. Adjusting for the extraordinary costs related to the layoffs in January, the EBIT margin would have been around 29%. The outlook for 2017 is maintained, the company says.In January, when Novozymes released its financial group statement for 2016 results, the Danish producer of enzymes also announced it was axing 198 employees, 62 of them in Denmark.Novozymes says that as part of the organizational changes, resources are being focused on high-growth opportunities and growth markets, and the company has continued its significant investments in R&D and technology leadership.It has also made good progress in its innovation pipeline with the launch of two new solutions in Bioenergy and BioAg. Furthermore, last month Novozymes embarked on a new strategic collaboration with Boehringer Ingelheim in probiotics for poultry hatcheries.“It’s been a good start to the year. The majority of our markets have developed well, and profitability was high. I’m pleased to see that we’re making progress on our strategic priorities, exemplified by the recent collaboration with Boehringer Ingelheim in probiotics for poultry hatcheries,” says Peder Holk Nielsen, President & CEO of Novozymes.“Finally, our pipeline of new innovation is advancing. All in all: positive developments in Q1.”Food & Beverages sales grew by 6% organically and by 8% in DKK compared with the same period last year. Food & Beverages growth came from most of the company’s segments, with starch, nutrition and brewing contributing most. As expected, sales to Novozymes baking business declined due to the implementation of reduced prices in the North American fresh-keeping market.Sales growth in starch came from several markets. China contributed the most to growth due to a combination of corn price developments and increased demand for our recently launched innovation.Total costs excluding net financials, share of losses in associates and tax were DKK 2.743 million, an increase of 3% or DKK 75 million compared with the first quarter of 2016.Gross profit increased by 4%, and the gross margin was 57.8% in the first quarter of 2017, slightly up compared with last year where the gross margin was 57.6%. Productivity improvements had a positive impact on the gross margin but were offset by unfavorable price/mix changes.Operating costs were DKK 1,164 million, an increase of DKK 26 million, mainly driven by higher sales and distribution costs. Operating costs as a percentage of sales were 31%, 1 percentage point lower than the first quarter of 2016.Sales and distribution costs increased by 6%, representing 12% of sales, while R&D costs were on par with last year, representing 13% of sales. Administrative costs increased by 1%, representing 6% of sales and other operating income totaled DKK 13 million in the first quarter of 2017, compared with DKK 9 million in the same period last year.Nutrition also showed good uptake, mainly in the developed markets, where Novozymes recent launch in low-lactose dairy, Saphera, has been well received. “Lastly, our products within raw material optimization for brewing continued to show good momentum,” the company claims.Net profit was DKK 772 million, an increase of 4% from DKK 745 million in the first quarter of 2016, driven by higher EBIT and a lower tax rate, but partly offset by higher net financial costs.In terms of sales outlook, three months into the year and Novozymes continues to expect to deliver organic sales growth of 2-5% in 2017, with all five sales areas contributing. The outlook for sales growth in Danish kroner remains unchanged at 3-6%.Food & Beverages sales growth is expected to be driven primarily by new products launched in the starch industry in 2016 and 2017. Growth is expected to be higher in emerging markets. Baking is still expected to be negatively impacted by implementation of reduced prices in the North American fresh keeping market.
With its umami-packed, fermented seasoning made from locally-sourced, organic lupin and oats, Austrian start-up Genusskoarl is bringing to the market its "soy sauce adapted to European tastes".Fermented foods, from sauerkraut to kombucha, are a hot topic with consumers, and German-speaking countries are leading the way.  © Benedikt Stonawski“Innovation [...] is increasingly focusing on the process of lacto-fermentation, an ancient technique which recently has been rediscovered by consumer products," says Mintel analyst, Julia Buech. "For some time now, traditional fermented vegetables, such as sauerkraut, have seen a revival, while fermented soft drinks in Germany, like Bionade and Fassbrause, have met a growing consumer desire for healthier, less sugary beverages.”­But for Karl Severin Traugott, food scientist and founder of Genusskoarl, the process of fermentation has always been a passion and that is what propelled him to create WienerWurze, a savoury sauce whose name is best translated as 'Viennese seasoning'.“My main motivation for doing this was because I’m fascinated by fermenting foods, the process is really interesting but if it’s a momentary food trend that I am also tapping into then that definitely helps.”"I chose lupin because of its amino acid profile, macro chemical properties and the fact that is an indigenous plant to Austria. The oats are for the fermentation process – you need a carbohydrate source. I wanted oats because it’s not so common which helps to increase biodiversity in fields and the agriculture sector and, for more personal reasons because I wrote my master thesis on the malting of oats, quinoa and amaranth.”The production methods for WienerWurze are the same as soy but the final product has a different amino acid profile and “a more European taste”, says Traugott.  The lupin seeds are locally sourced. © Christian Lendl“It’s a very universal product [with a] salty and umami taste so you can use it for everything you would add salt to in order to enhance the flavour of the dish in natural way. Personally I use it for meat marinades, salad dressings or to season soups instead of stock cubes.”The other two ingredients are organic salt – additive-free with no added iodine or anti-caking agent – and water.“The food industry tells us they need to add additives but I get the [functional] benefits from just four ingredients.”As for the target consumer, Traugott said the product will appeal to anyone who is interested in where food products actually come from. “There’s a huge trend of people wanting high traceability and one of my goals is to share the story right at the start the story of the network of farmers from whom I buy raw materials directly […] via a QR code, they can know the grain was grown in this field, in this month.”Located on the outskirts of Vienna, Genusskoarl sources its ingredients from local, organic farmers and the seasoning will retail for €4.99 in 100 ml bottles and €6.99 for 250 ml.Lacto-fermentation is the most common type of fermentation. It leads to a decrease in the level of carbohydrates and an increase in beneficial enzymes, various strains of probiotics and friendly bacteria, and is said to help break down foods to a more digestible form.Traugott explains: “The first step is a dry fermentation process. We soak and cook the lupin and roast and crush the oats. Then they are mixed with a starting culture, aspergillus oryzae, and this slightly humid mixture ferments at 30 degrees.“A malt culture starts to grow on the product, and after three days the whole mixture is completely covered by malt. We add the saline solution and then the second fermentation step, which takes up to four months, begins.“This is spontaneous fermentation – lactic acid bacteria grow and feed on the protein supplied by lupin. That gives the umami flavour."I haven’t done any major investigations into [the probiotic composition], but I’m pretty sure the sauce contains bacteria produced during the fermentation, and I believe these have health benefits," he says. "It might have probiotic properties but were not making any claims as it’s not possible in Europe.” Traugott says the biggest challenge was finding finance.But the 112 backers that Genusskoarl received during its Kickstarter campaign  - who helped it go beyond its €10,000 target – was proof for the food scientist-turned-entrepreneur that he was on to a winning idea.“I had backing from a lot of friends and family but also many people I’d never met. It made me realise that I’m on the right [path] because their support is like direct feedback from the market.”Genusskoarl can currently produce batches of 400 – 500 litres, and it takes up to four months to produce a single batch. For the minute the start-up will be focussing on Austria and Germany - several organic retailers have already expressed an interest  in listing the seasoning -  but Traugott ultimately has export ambitions beyond there. 
France's official - but voluntary - nutrition label has its first takers as retailers Intermarché, Leclerc and Auchan as well as meat, seafood and ready meal manufacturer Fleury Michon commit to its use on their products.The nutrition logo, NutriScore, was recently adopted as France’s official label and received the backing of the World Health Organisation, which praised it for being “straightforward” and easy-to-understand.Under EU rules regarding the single market, however, it can only be applied on a voluntary basis.“Without waiting for the publication of the decree, several companies - Intermarché, Leclerc, Auchan and Fleury Michon - have today committed to put in place this system of nutritional information on all the products of their brands. Others have expressed their intention to commit themselves in the near future,” said a statement issued by the Ministry of Health.French consumer rights organisation UFC-Que Choisir welcomed the initiative. “[We] call on other manufacturers and distributors to align themselves with this labelling model which is both the most effective for consumers and the only one to benefit from the recognition of the state,” it said.It also went on to give examples of comparatively healthy choices that could be made for a balanced breakfast, such as Leclerc's 'Epi d'or' bread rolls, Intermarché 'Chabrior' whole wheat bread or 'toaster' muffins from home Auchan. Fleury Michon’s Moroccan couscous would make a healthy light lunch, it said. 
Saturated fat does not clog up arteries nor increase the chance of a heart attack, according to a team of doctors whose views have triggered a wave of criticism.In an editorial, published in the British Journal of Sports Medicine, the researchers described current thinking on the effect dietary saturated fat has on health as "just plain wrong."The paper also pointed an accusatory finger at research emphasising the need to lower cholesterol levels.This market driver of ‘proven to lower cholesterol’ and ‘low-fat’ foods,’ the team said, had been "misguided.""Coronary artery disease is a chronic inflammatory disease and it can be reduced effectively by walking 22 min a day and eating real food," the review stated. "There is no business model or market to help spread this simple yet powerful intervention."Key to their opinions was research  that showed no link between saturated fat intake and death, coronary heart disease (CHD), CHD mortality, stroke or type 2 diabetes (T2D) in healthy adults.Similarly in the prevention of CHD the team said there was no benefit from reducing fat, including saturated fat, on myocardial infarction, cardiovascular or all-cause mortality.One solution put forward was the adoption of a Mediterranean-style diet coupled with 20 or so minutes of physical activity a day as sufficient enough reduce the risk of heart complications.“In comparison with advice to follow a ‘low fat’ diet (37% fat), an energy-unrestricted Mediterranean diet (41% fat) supplemented with at least four tablespoons of extra virgin olive oil or a handful of nuts achieved a significant 30% reduction in cardiovascular events in over 7500 high-risk patients,” the team pointed out.  'Coronary artery disease is a chronic inflammatory disease and it can be reduced effectively by walking 22 min a day and eating real food,' the editorial stated. ©iStockThe paper’s authors, Aseem Malhotra, a cardiologist at the Lister hospital in Stevenage, Pascal Meier, a cardiologist at University College London and editor of the journal BMJ Open Heart and Rita Redberg, the editor of the American journal JAMA Internal Medicine, received a barrage of criticism from fellow cardiologists and experts.Prof. Alun Hughes, professor of Cardiovascular Physiology and Pharmacology, described the editorial as "muddled" adding to "confusion on a contentious topic."Others went further stating that the authors had reported evidence simplistically and selectively.Dr Amitava Banerjee, senior clinical lecturer in Clinical Data Science and Honorary Consultant Cardiologist at University College London, was one such critic.“The authors failed to cite a rigorous Cochrane systematic review which concluded that cutting down dietary saturated fat was associated with a 17% reduction in cardiovascular events including coronary heart disease on the basis of 15 randomised trials. “A lot of the evidence the authors quote about saturated fats, including the systematic review , is based on observational data, making it harder to draw conclusions, due to confounding factors.”Dr Christine Williams, professor of Human Nutrition at the University of Reading, questioned the reasons for publishing these findings.“Snappy editorials recently published by a well-known cardiologist continue to argue the case for saturated fats as an innocent bystander in cardiovascular disease.“The nature of their public health advice appears to be one of ‘Let them eat nuts and olive oil’ with no consideration of how this might be successfully achieved in the UK general population and in people of different ages, socio-economic backgrounds or dietary preferences. Dr Gavin Sandercock, reader in Clinical Physiology (Cardiology) and Director of Research at the University of Essex pointed out that the definition of real food was unclear in the piece adding that the editorial was not founded on good evidence.  “There is no such thing as ‘real food’ – the authors don’t define what it is so it’s meaningless.”The editorial’s opinions were not entirely dismissed as their views on physical activity and choice of food were backed by some authors.“An encouraging element of the editorial is repetition of the current consensus for healthy lifestyle interventions including physical activity and management of stress,” said Dr David Nunan, senior researcher at the Centre for Evidence Based Medicine, University of Oxford.“Though the source and quality of evidence for the specific recommendation of 22 minutes of walking is not given.”Dr Mary Hannon-Fletcher, head of School, Health Sciences, Ulster University, said it was the best dietary and exercise advice she had read in recent years.“Walking 22 min a day and eating REAL food. This is an excellent public health message, the modern idea of a healthy diet where we eat low fat and low calorie foods is simply not a healthy option.”“Eating reduced fat foods, will not have a positive impact on the body’s metabolism as a whole,It may indeed, have a negative effect on important hormonal production. So eating real foods, in moderation and exercising daily is the answer to keeping fit and healthy.”Source: British Journal of Sports MedicinePublished online ahead of print: doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-097285 “Saturated fat does not clog the arteries: coronary heart disease is a chronic inflammatory condition, the risk of which can be effectively reduced from healthy lifestyle interventions.”Authors: Aseem Malhotra, Rita F Redberg, Pascal Meier 
New rules on low calorie diets could wipe out manufacturers and distributors of weight loss programmes in Europe, according to an industry trade body which is urging regulators to seek a compromise agreement.Low calorie diets (LCD:800-1200 calories a day) and very low calorie diets (VLCD:400-800 calories a day) are niche and are often prescribed by healthcare professionals to patients suffering from clinical obesity.They contain regular food ingredients, such as vegetables, soya, milk, fat and pasta in dried form.Amid growing levels of obesity, and the financial strain on healthcare providers of meeting this challenge, the European Commission called on the European Foods Standards Agency (EFSA) to produce a report to help it decide on how best to regulate such low-calorie diets across the EU. Regulators thought the previous guidance had become outdated.While the EFSA report was welcomed by the pan European group, Specialised Nutrition European (SNE), saying it could help "tackle the societal challenges of obesity," the VLCD industry group- whose LCD and VLCD members operate across Europe-has warned the new legislation could prove disastrous for its members and consumers.  'It is essential that these rules are looked at again and that a compromise is reached in order to ensure the continued existence of these vital products.'©iStock/piotr_malczykSpeaking to NuraIngredients, professor Anthony Leeds, medical director of the VLCD Industry Group, said the VLCD industry "could fold" and it was "essential that these rules are looked at again and that a compromise is reached in order to ensure the continued existence of these vital products."“This proposed new legislation is going to have catastrophic effects on ordinary consumers simply wanting to manage their weight loss,” Dr Leeds told us.Despite the plea, time is running out, as the proposals are set to be rubber stamped by the European parliament in the coming months, thus becoming law.Should the VLCD Industry Group’s dire prediction come true then the fortunes of leading companies in this field such as Nestlé, Cambridge Weight Plan and Lightlife, could take a tumble.The VLCD Industry Group’s argument is centred on new rules on composition which it argues would make diets "very difficult to manufacture" and would "taste unpleasant, have an unappealing texture, go off quite quickly and be much more expensive for consumers."For example, Dr Leeds points to new rules demanding that diet replacement regimes should contain a minimum of 75 grams (g) of protein, compared to previous demands of 50g.“The evidence that you need these higher amounts of protein is not that strong,” he told us.The trade body is also unhappy about new demands on levels of essential fatty acids (11g for linoleic acids and 1.4g for alpha linoleic) and says overall the new demands will lead to "a sharp increase in production costs."A further point of contention, according to Dr Leeds, is that the original EFSA document was not put out for consultation before being submitted to the European Commission.The VLCD Industry Group is now calling on MEPs to reject the proposals and has put forward a compromise agreement, which would include a 60g minimum level of protein and a 6g minimum level of linoleic acids and 0.7g minimum level of alpha linoleic.It argues the compromise agreement would provide "high consumer protection" whilst "addressing manufacturers’ food technological problems." 
Food groups are being urged to curb the amount of unnecessary antibiotics used in the supply chain because it has serious consequences for human health and more needs to be done to cut out the excessive use in meat and poultry. And it is the investors behind some of the big name food companies that are so concerned that they are warning about the medical and financial impacts of the overuse of antibiotics.A coalition – which includes Aviva Investors and Boston Common Asset Management – of 71 investors is issuing the warning about the “frightening” health and financial consequences associated with the overuse of antibiotics by food and restaurant companies.The concerns focus on how overusing antibiotics in meat and poultry builds resistance in people. Often, animals like chickens and pigs that are raised in closed quarters are given antibiotics to help them grow and to prevent the spread of infection.In February, FoodIngredientsFirst reported how the latest findings by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) show that bacteria found in humans, animals and food continue to show resistance to widely used antimicrobials.This underlines the fact that AMR poses a serious threat to public and animal health, say the authorities as infections caused by bacteria that are resistant to antimicrobials lead to approximately 25,000 deaths across Europe every year.ShareAction is the investment organization that bought the investors together alongside the FAIRR Initiative.It’s new investor report profiles how fast food giants such as McDonald’s Corporation and Yum! Brands are responding to a US$2 trillion investor coalition call to reduce the overuse of medically important antibiotics by large meat and poultry producers. The report also reveals new research underscoring the link between the use of antibiotics in livestock and the rise of antibiotic resistant bacteria in humans.The rise of antibiotic resistance has been described by WHO as, “one of the biggest threats to global health today”, exposing institutional investors to significant material risks. Inappropriate use of antibiotics in livestock is seen as a key factor in better prevention and the US$2 trillion investor coalition including Aviva Investors, Aegon Asset Management, Natixis Asset Management and Coller Capital engaged a US$170 billion group of ten large restaurant companies in March 2016 to end the routine overuse use of medically important antibiotics.Responses show that 70% of companies have now adopted either a comprehensive or partial policy to prohibit use in poultry, up from 50% in March 2016; 80% of companies report they are now actively engaging with suppliers to monitor antibiotic usage. Yum! Brands however was the only company that ignored a request for further information.None of the companies surveyed have developed fully comprehensive, publicly available antibiotics policies to cover their entire livestock supply chain.“There is a growing public focus on rising levels of antibiotic resistance and the risks it poses to public health systems and ultimately to portfolio value. Antibiotic resistance is gaining traction as an important investment risk factor and the investor engagement is to be commended for ensuring this message is heard loud and clear in the restaurant sector. The pension funds and asset managers in the investor coalition will be watching closely to see what further reductions in antibiotic use can be made in this sector and beyond,” says Richard Keery, Investment Manager, Strathclyde Pension Fund.The report, “The restaurant sector and antibiotic risk,” cites changing regulation – including potential new EU legislation which would ban routine preventative use of antibiotics on farms, already voted through the European Parliament, and 2017 US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidance on antibiotic use – as a key financial risk for companies failing to improve practices.The report also highlights new analysis from a Cambridge University-backed study reinforcing scientific opinion that antibiotic resistant bacteria, such as some strains of E. coli, can spread from livestock to humans via food consumption.“Investors are not immune to antibiotic resistance. It’s hard to put a monetary cost on antibiotics becoming useless, but some estimate it could lose US$100 trillion from global economic output, creating an enormous global financial and public health crisis. New regulation, shifting consumer preferences and trade restrictions are already driving a reduction in antibiotic use in livestock. The clear message to these companies is that their shareholders want to see meaningful action on antibiotics,” Jeremy Coller, Founder of the FAIRR Initiative and CIO of Coller Capital.“The last year has seen encouraging commitments to reduce antibiotic use in poultry, but there are still dangerous levels of antibiotics administered to pigs, cattle and other livestock. Fast food chains must take action across the entire animal supply chain.”Since its launch in March 2016, the investor group backing this engagement has grown to 71 institutions representing more than US$2 trillion in assets under management.Natalie Beinisch, Engagement Manager, Aegon Asset Management, adds: “To protect against threats to the financial health of our clients, we also need to care about physical threats to public health. That is why Aegon takes a proactive approach to the management of health-related risks.”“Antibiotic resistance is one of the most serious emerging global health risks and to help defend against such an enormous threat we are encouraging fast food chains to reduce the non-therapeutic use of antibiotics important to human health in their global meat and poultry supply chains. FAIRR is rightly urging the restaurant sector to take action to counter this trend.”“The FAIRR/ShareAction investor coalition on antibiotics has grown by more than one third since this engagement began. Clearly, these major investors recognize that antimicrobial resistance is a threat to markets and to healthy workforces. Consumers are also paying more attention to what’s in their food. The combined force of investor and consumer concern means restaurant and food companies run substantial risks if they don’t set targets to phase out routine use of antibiotics in their supply chains,” adds Catherine Howarth, Chief Executive at ShareAction.By Gaynor Selby
Europe’s top CEOs in food and drink gathered in Dublin last Friday to call for a comprehensive free trade agreement between the EU27 and the UK post-Brexit. Enterprise Ireland and Food Drink Ireland (FDI), the Ibec group that represents the sector, have welcomed the visit of the board of FoodDrinkEurope, the EU organization for the food and drink industry, to Dublin.The meeting of top European agri-food CEOs, followed an invitation by Enterprise Ireland, which is responsible for the attraction of food related Foreign Direct Investment into Ireland.Over two days there were meetings with An Taoiseach Enda Kenny, Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation Mary Mitchell O’Connor and Minister for Agriculture, Food and Marine, Michael Creed as well as with the leaders of many Irish and global food companies and food R&D organizations.Speaking in advance of the FoodDrinkEurope board meeting, An Taoiseach Enda Kenny said, “Ireland is regarded as a major producer of quality food products within the EU and it is testament to the valuable resources, infrastructure and community surrounding the indigenous food and drink industry that the FoodDrinkEurope board chose to conduct their meeting here.”“The Government is committed to our membership of the EU and the single market and we look forward to our continued participation with FoodDrinkEurope through Food Drink Ireland and Enterprise Ireland, as we continue to communicate our strengths within the sector and to deepen our trading relationship within the Eurozone.”“The food industry is one of Ireland’s most important sectors. Enterprise Ireland’s FDI client base employ over 10,000 people in Ireland and represent over 35% of our food exports. The visit of the board of FoodDrinkEurope to Ireland is an excellent opportunity to engage at senior level, allowing Irish exporters the chance to network and exchange ideas with global leaders in the food industry and explore the unique challenges facing the industry by Brexit and at the same time, discuss opportunities for collaboration in the future,” adds  Julie Sinnamon, CEO, Enterprise Ireland.Danny McCoy, CEO of Ibec, added that it’s the “open nature” of the Irish economy that had led to it being one of Europe’s “greatest economic success stories”.“Many reasons can be attributed to this, but the particular strength of our exporting sectors is something to be extremely proud of. To take the example of the Irish agri-food industry, it is the largest net exporter of beef and dairy ingredients in Europe, it exports to 180 countries and, accounts for one in eight jobs in the Irish economy. The success of this business model has been driven both by a strong indigenous sector and by the many international companies operating in Ireland.”“This success also means it is a sector most exposed to trade disruption due to Brexit. The industry exports €4.1 bn of food and drink to the UK alone, 40% of total exports for the sector.”He adds how the relationship with the UK is set to change fundamentally in the coming years and the task now is to ensure Irish interests are forcefully protected and advanced as formal exit negotiations happen.“The Irish agri-food industry must therefore play a central and strategic role in upcoming discussions. The visit of the board of FoodDrinkEurope to Ireland today is very positive from an Irish business perspective, demonstrating the support we have gathered at an EU level for our negotiation stance throughout the Brexit process,” he adds.FoodDrinkEurope President Gilles Morel, Regional President Europe & Eurasia of MARS Chocolate, highlighted that across the EU, just as in Ireland, the food and drink sector is the number one manufacturing sector in terms of employment and turnover, and the bedrock of rural communities.Speaking during the visit to Dublin, he stated” “The EU single market underpins the competitiveness of an industry that has an ambition of generating value added growth of 2.5%-3.5% per year by 2025 and is vital for further success of our industry. We call on the Irish Government and other member states to defend its future and we will make sure the voice of our sector is heard in the negotiations at European level.”“A comprehensive free trade agreement between the EU27 and the UK is necessary in order to minimize economic uncertainty and potential damage to the food and drink sector across all of Europe. Brexit negotiations must also ensure a transition period to protect the integrated supply chains that many European food companies have between EU27 member states and the UK.”Ahead of the meeting, FDI and FoodDrinkEurope have jointly called for discussions on the future EU-UK trading relationship to be commenced early in the negotiating process and to ensure: An ambitious and balanced EU27 - UK agreement including a frictionless north-south border on the island of Ireland; a clear transitional arrangements supportive of EU27-UK supply chains and minimal regulatory divergence.
There is a whole school of thought that edible insects can provide a whole new source of sustainable protein. In 2013 the United Nations Food & Agriculture Organization stressed that a new approach to food production was crucial if we are to avoid future shortages - and its suggestion was edible insects.The sustainability credentials of insects is what lead the UN to highlight them as the potential future of food, requiring minimal resources to farm and producing substantially less waste than conventional livestock.Despite the fact that around two billion people around the world already consume insects as part of their regular diet due to their high nutritional value, versatility and flavor, plus a recent burst of product innovations in terms of insect protein bars, drinks and powder products – there are still big question marks over whether Western consumers will ever really take to consuming insects.A study conducted by researcher Muriel Verain from Wageningen University & Research recently found that there is no difference to general attitudes towards eating whole insects or processed insects. She conducted research into the opportunities for eating beans, seaweed and insects, revealing that eating insects is still very much at the outset.She says that although beans, seaweed and insects are valuable alternative sources of protein, when it comes to consumers accepting insects – processed or otherwise – we still have a long way to go in the Western World.“People don’t want to, or they find it disgusting. It also makes almost no difference whether it’s whole or processed insects,” she says.“If you are going to eat insects, these are usually mealworms, locusts and crickets. You can also look at insects as feed for animals, for instance; but this would concern other insects. Both avenues were examined in the research.”Part of the study involved a diverse collection of respondents spread over seven treatments. People were asked about their intention to eat insects in various forms including four options concerning eating insects yourself: general, freeze-dried, fried or processed into a product. Consumers were also asked about beef hamburgers made from the meat of cows that had been fed insects, and regular hamburgers, as a comparison.The test divided emotions into two categories: positive (happy, proud, satisfied) and negative (angry, guilty, sad). Disgust was also a possible reaction. While it was expected people would be more open to products with processed insects, Verain found few differences between the four insect-based products.“The emotions were almost the same for the different products. Even if the insects have been processed into a different product, people still have the same emotions as with whole insects. It was striking that people were no more willing to eat processed insects than they were whole ones.”Emotions were also striking regarding hamburgers from cows that had eaten insects. People were certainly not positive about it.“For example, people thought hamburgers from cows that have eaten insects would be harder to prepare and would be less tasty compared with normal hamburgers,' says Verain. 'Beef apparently isn’t just beef,” adds Verain.The feelings of disgust associated with eating insects was greater than with eating hamburgers, even if these are hamburgers from cows that have eaten insects.The research also found that emotions ran higher for people who have never even tried insects. These people experienced even more negative emotions and disgust.However, there were some positive views, in that eating insects is healthy, sustainable and natural, and that it would result in a healthy weight. Despite that, people saw insects as less safe than beef.“There's still a long way to go as far as insect consumption is concerned. I would think eating insects is certainly an option for cattle feed in the short term. In the long term, invisibly processing insects into products instead of using whole, visible ones seems the best step toward getting people into insects.”However, changing social attitudes towards consuming insects is extremely challenging.Of the participants in the study, only 15% had tried insects once, and another 35% were open to it.“That means half of people are willing to try insects. Social standards are significant when it comes to people's intention, and eating insects clearly has a cultural aspect. What do people around you think you should be doing?”Verain also noted how standards change over time. “Look at smoking and peer pressure. Starting to smoke used to be cool, but now things have changed, albeit gradually. It called for a range of measures, coupled with laws and regulations from the government. It will take some time for insects, too. We can explore different avenues in the meantime, such as insects as cattle feed and eating beans and seaweed. While not everyone in the Netherlands has to start eating insects, it’s good if it’s one of the options, so that people start varying their diet more.”Despite the emotional feelings towards eating insects, they are still part of the trending alternative protein space and will continue to be so as more innovations come online.Earlier this yearFoodIngredientsFirstdetailed some of these alternatives, including insects. For more information,read more.By Gaynor Selby
Earlier this year European Fresh Produce Association Freshfel - a non-profit association and the forum for the fresh fruit and vegetables supply chain in Europe and beyond - published a vegetable-inspired consumption trends report.FoodIngredientsFirsttakes a closer look at this report, the latest data on trends within the fresh produce sector as well as the challenges to overcome and opportunities up for grabs.In recent years there has been a definite rise in the number of vegetable-related food trends around the world. From the increase in the numbers of people adopting a vegan, vegetarian and/or flexitarian diet to the rise in days like meat-free Mondays or Veggie-Friday (often boosted by trends on social media), the emphasis on eating more fruit and vegetables has got much stronger. But are people eating more of the good stuff?While the American Heart Association recommends eating eight or more servings of fruit and vegetables a day (an average adult consuming 2,000 calories daily should aim for 4.5 cups of fruits and vegetables a day, it advises), the World Health Organization recommends a minimum of 400g of fruit and vegetables per day (excluding potatoes and other starchy tubers) for the prevention of chronic diseases such as heart disease, cancer, diabetes and obesity, as well as for the prevention and alleviation of several micronutrient deficiencies, especially in less developed countries.Earlier this year a study by UK scientists revealed that up to 7.8 million deaths per year could be prevented if people were to eat 10 portions of fresh fruit and vegetables each day as opposed to the familiar “five-a-day” public health message that has been around in Britain for more than a decade. That would mean increasing fresh produce consumption from 400 grams daily to 800 grams daily.“Starting with the general fruit and vegetable consumption trends in Europe, we can see a slight increase in the EU average during 2013 and 2014, particularly regarding fruit consumption,” says Freshfel.“In 2014, the average net consumption in the EU stood at 353 grams, per person, per day. While this remains below the minimum recommendation of 400 grams by the World Health Organization (WHO), overall it is a positive sign that consumption has increased again slightly, which hopefully will continue in the future," Freshfel adds.According to Freshfel, in order to boost this positive development, society, as well as the sector, must continue to promote fruits and vegetables and further build on the factors that have started to improve the consumption trends.Reaching the consumer remains challenging, says Freshfel. The sector needs to closely monitor the myriad of different types of consumers these days, as there is no real standard. Alongside the individual preferences of the consumer, there are other factors to consider like family, society structures and changing lifestyles as well as trends like personalized nutrition and swapping in more healthy ingredients,  it says.“Interestingly, there also is an increased awareness and attention for non-traditional consumers and personalized consumption, such as gluten-free, fair trade, organic, vegan, just to name few.”“Coincidentally, it also has become much easier for consumers to act on these preferences, as it’s more widely available and not limited to specialized shops,” it adds.Vegetable-Inspired LifestyleWhile food innovators continue to create new product developments inspired by fruit and vegetables, demonstrated by the rise in plant-based ingredients, plant-based proteins as replacements for meat and alike, there is a focus on reducing meat consumption in the foodservice industry as well.Or at the very least some restaurateurs are cashing in on veggie-inspired menus or even opening entire restaurants dedicated to one fruit - case in point; The recently opened Amsterdam restaurant, The Avocado Show, describes itself as Europe’s first all-avocado restaurant, and in the last few weeks avocado aficionados have been making a beeline for Brooklyn’s new avocado “fast food” restaurant Avocaderia.At the same time, chefs (celebrity and otherwise) continuously looking for new and unusual ingredients to add flavor and texture to their culinary creations as well as boost their healthy, nutritional credentials. And this very often involves fruit and vegetables.A quick look at popular celebrity chefs in the UK shows much of their recent work - whether it’s in the kitchen or using their voice and fame to campaign on an issue and lobby government - is directed towards boosting the consumption of fruit and vegetables.The same is true for other types of cooking trends, many of which have been influenced by the desire to promote fruit and vegetable consumption. Spiralizing, where vegetables are cut into long and thin ribbons and smoothie making have boosted consumption, not to mention sales of the gadgets that go with them. And even barbecuing, traditionally only associated with meat, is much more veggie-friendly with new product developments specifically promoting veggie alternatives for the grill.“There could be some opportunity for the sector to promote fruit and vegetables, not just as your five-a-day, but as part of alternative diet choices and your meat-free-Monday alternative,” says Freshfel.Social MediaAnother element that could be better utilized for the promotion of fresh produce is the use of online marketing and social media, according to Freshfel.Fruits and vegetables are great products for which to create online and social media marketing. At any given moment, you can take a look at Instagram, Facebook and Pinterest for literally hundreds of thousands of posts.“Being part of the ‘online generation’ myself, I personally see great potential for online and social media promotion for fresh produce. Fruits and vegetables are interesting, colorful and fun products, which can be communicated very effectively online,” adds Freshfel’s Daphne van Doorn.Freshfel itself is tapping into the power of social media with the recent launch of its campaign, alongside European farmers organization Copa Cogeca, last month.The #FruitVeg4You hashtag raises awareness and encourages an increase in consumption across Europe and will share content created by the organization’s members, as well as specially created content, facts and figures about fruit and vegetables, in addition to interesting articles. “As social media has its momentum now and is here to stay, the aim of the campaign is to reach a wider European audience through this channel. Fruit and vegetable consumption is not where it could be, this our contribution, to encourage more sharing on social media about good promotions, campaigns and activities related to fruit and vegetables,” says Freshfel.In conclusion, Freshfel says that the consumption of fruit and vegetables is slowly on the rise in EU, so society, as well as the sector, should build on this momentum.“There is a rising trend for veggie-inspired lifestyles, as well as other consumer diversification segments such as local, seasonal, organic, fair trade, sustainable, healthy nutrition, quality labels, etc. All these elements could be used to effectively communicate to consumers (online as well as offline) by emphasizing the great assets of fresh fruits and vegetables Fresh produce are colorful, positive and sustainable: fresh, fun and versatile."by Gaynor Selby
New knowledge on milk composition and quality is of essential importance to consumers as well as the industry. There are therefore considerable research efforts in milk worldwide. One of the major topics concerns milk's content of different proteins and their importance to human health. Basically, milk consists of two protein types - whey and casein. Casein can be further divided into four categories. One of these, beta casein, attracts particular attention. Several beta casein types exist and A1 and A2 are the most common.It has been suggested that A2-protein milk is a healthier alternative to A1-protein milk, as the latter is claimed to metabolize into potentially detrimental peptides in the intestine. One specific peptide formed during digestion is further claimed to have unfavorable effects on the consumers drinking it. However, the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) dismissed these claims in 2009 as undocumented.It is currently debated whether some of the discomfort reported by some milk consumers regarding impact on the gastrointestinal system may be caused by discomfort originating from these detrimental peptides. A2-milk has been labelled a more "original" milk and is closer to breast milk. Foreign companies have succeeded in establishing specialized industries that sell milk that only contains A2-type beta casein. In December 2016, the Danish dairy Thise introduced a Danish variant.This particular area still requires additional research and there is no scientific evidence to substantiate that one protein type is superior compared to the other, states Professor Lotte Bach Larsen, Department of Food Science at Aarhus University: “I acknowledge that further research and examination is required within this particular area in order to base the debate on solid, fact-based argumentation. We cannot rule out that some consumers, who feel discomfort when consuming milk, might benefit from drinking solely A2-milk.”In a recently finished investigation, Lotte Bach Larsen and her colleagues from the Department of Food Science cooperated with Norwegian scientists to examine if the two different protein types give rise to different metabolization patterns and thus the formation of potentially bioactive protein fragments. In their examination the scientists used gastric and intestinal juices from humans to study how enzymes in the gastrointestinal tract break down the proteins. The experiment was accomplished in a laboratory model system and using protein types that were purified from milk from cows whose milk contained either solely A1 or A2 variants of the protein.The examination demonstrates - quite as expected - that a number of different peptides is formed from both protein types, when the milk is metabolized. But, it also turns out that the peptide in question is actually present when both A1 and A2 milk is digested. However, the content of this specific peptide formed from A1 beta casein protein variant by the human digestion enzymes was approx. three times higher than liberated from the A2 beta casein variant. As this study was carried out with purified beta casein variants, there is a need to examine whether there is a difference in content of this specific peptide, if digestion is going on using milk and not simply isolated beta casein proteins. In addition, it would be beneficial to carry out a proper human intervention study on eventual the effects when consuming the two different types of milk, and also examine if the peptide can be measured in the blood, says Lotte Bach Larsen.Another interesting aspect when discussing the difference between A1 and A2 milk is the fact that milk containing the A2-type beta casein is actually the most frequent type in Danish dairy cattle. Scientists from the Department of Food Science were able to conclude this fact when they - in connection with a major research project - carried out a screening of the protein composition of Danish milk. Actually, the frequency of the A2 protein was almost the same in both Danish Jersey cattle and Danish Holstein cattle.“It is rather interesting if consumers consider A2 milk to be something unique and special. We should point out that even though most of the Danish milk is mixed, dairy milk will normally contain both types, but with levels of the A2 type over the A1 type, as it seems that A2 is present in highest frequency over the A1 vatiant. If you choose a milk type that specifically contains the A2 protein of the beta casein, you should know that this milk comes from cows that have been screened for the variants and selected for this production,” says Lotte Bach Larsen.She hopes that the future will bring an increased focus on studies in the metabolism of milk proteins in human studies.Basically, milk consists of two protein types - whey and casein. Casein can be further divided into four categories, and one of these, beta casein, attracts particular attention. Several beta casein types exist and A1 and A2 are the most common. The difference between the two types consists of two changed amino acids.
Seven Irish food and drink companies have joined a new Bord Bia and KSG Catering initiative that seeks to help smaller companies get their product ranges listed in the foodservice market. For the first time Bord Bia and KSG Catering have come together to form the 'In.gredients' programme, aimed at providing these businesses with tailored support to assist them secure and grow business in some of the 110 outlets run by KSG Catering around the country.KSG Catering, an Irish owned company, currently employs over 1,100 people and serves food to more than 12 million customers annually. Companies benefitting from the programme reflect the areas where KSG is looking to grow their supply base and range from natural and healthy snacks, to indulgent hand cooked vegetable crisps, premium Irish charcuterie and award winning spices, sauces and chutneys. According to Sandra Burns from Joe’s Farm vegetable crisps who is participating on the programme, "This offers me invaluable access to the necessary people and insight into how companies such as KSG operate and choose suppliers. I am delighted to be taking part as foodservice is a sector I have not looked into supplying yet, so I hope I can open doors for the business and take it to the next level."The foodservice or “out of home” market has grown to a record €7.5 billion in 2016, and is forecasted to grow to over €9 billion by 2020, according to Bord Bia. Foodservice describes all food consumed out of home, from restaurants, hotels, coffee shops and bars to workplace catering, hospitals, education and vending. This market has benefited from better than anticipated economic growth, buoyant consumer confidence, a strong domestic and international tourist market (including business tourism), an unemployment rate that is now less than 7%, and the continuation of 9% VAT for hospitality. Highlighting the sector’s prospects, Maureen Gahan, Bord Bia's Foodservice Specialist said, "Foodservice in Ireland offers major opportunities for food and drink companies providing innovative products and solutions to meet changing consumer needs. Through programmes such as this, we are equipping companies with the necessary skillset to target this growing industry."The six-month long workshop based programme, coordinated by Bord Bia, will support companies at varying stages in their development. In addition, participants will receive bespoke mentoring and access to relevant KSG personnel and route to market partners in order to gain an understanding of the organisation’s processes and procedures. Clear objectives and targets are set for each company to help them achieve key opportunities identified for their business with KSG.KSG provides bespoke contract catering solutions to a broad range of clients operating in the following industry sectors - professional offices, healthcare, education and travel. The company also operates a number of restaurants in shopping centres around the country including SoMa Burger, Noah & Co Bistro Cafe and Leopold Coffee Houses. The company has also partnered with Michelin-starred restaurateur, Patrick Guilbaud, on a premium hospitality focused catering offering for corporate clients. KSG was also awarded Ireland’s Sustainable Restauranteur of the Year 2016. Nick Andrews, Group Head of Culinary Operations, KSG, commented, "As a 100% Irish owned company, KSG is proud to partner with Bord Bia to support the development of local food producers. We are delighted that through this programme, Irish companies will have the opportunity to use KSG scale to grow their business and learn from our foodservice experience and consumer insight."The participating companies include:1. Forage&Cure, a Dublin based 4th generation Master Butcher, produce a range of locally cured Irish pork charcuterie.2. The Galway Food Company is a manufacturer of a range of shortbread biscuits that uses locally sourced ingredients including Galway Bay lavender and Connemara seaweed.3. Midleton based Green Saffron is a multi-award-winning family business producing spice blends, sauces and chutneys from spices sourced in India.4. Joe’s Farm Crisps for their vegetable crisps, grown and cooked on their own farm in East Cork.5. Natasha’s Living Food, suppliers of a vegan and raw food snack range6. Synerchi is a certified organic, naturally free from dairy and gluten range of refreshing effervescent Kombucha drinks with only 59Kcals per bottle.7. Urban Artisan, owners of the Cracked Nut food shop in Dublin, is a family owned business producing a range of 100% natural, dairy free, gluten free raw energy balls.
There's a truly international flavor again to the new products hitting the dairy shelves in April.There are six nations represented this month, and we are always looking to extend that with new and interesting products to feature. If you have a new product to announce, please send us the details  here - along with a picture of the product.In the UK, Arla is extending its Arla Protein range with the launch of two new products – Arla Protein Pouches and Arla Protein Greens.The 200g yogurt-based snack pouches contain 20g of protein per serving in two flavors - Strawberry and Mango.Arla Protein Greens sees the brand launch a Mango Kale and Lime flavor variant into the core range; it is available in Asda and Tesco, RRP £1.25.The Arla Protein Pouches are available in Tesco stores with an RRP of £1.25.Bertolli has launched its first range of block butters in the UK, comprising of two variants - Bertolli with Butter & Olive Oil and Bertolli Sensations with Lemon & Chilli.Each Bertolli block is a blend of butter and olive oil and has been created to allow consumers to enjoy butter without the risk of burning - even when cooking at high temperatures.Rachel Chambers, Bertolli brand manager at Unilever UK, said the new variants are designed to help cooks get creative in the kitchen and experiment with new flavor combinations without the worry of burning.Bertolli Butter & Olive Oil 250g Block has an RRP of £1.60 and Bertolli Sensations 250g Block has an RRP of £1.80.In Australia, Ashgrove Cheese has teamed up with ALDI to create four new Ashgrove Branded cheeses for national release. They hit the shelves in more than 500 stores on April 1.Ashgrove Tasmanian Farm Heavenly Havarti Range comes in four variants: Smooth & Creamy; infused with Jalapeno; infused with bacon; and Cold Smoked.Ashgrove said the deal has created five additional jobs at its Tasmania headquarters.In New Zealand, Auckland-based Angel Food has launched a vegan dairy-free cheddar alternative that is dairy-free and vegan, is gluten-free, and contains no soy or nuts.The 300g block is made from modified pea and maize starch, and is available throughout the country.In France, Mamie Nova has launched its Cœur de Fruit range of yogurts.The range consists of three flavors; Wild Strawberry; Passionfruit; and Orange and Grapefruit. The two-120g pots sell for €1.29.There are also three new flavors in its 150g Gourmand range: Lychee and Rose; Dragonfruit; and Vanilla of the Indies.US company Gaspari Nutrition is adding a new protein product to its lineup.MyoPure 100% Pure Micellar Casein is sourced from German company Molkereigesellschaft Lauingen mbH (MGL).MGL’s proprietary MCC 881 is a low-heat spray-dried micellar casein produced from fresh skimmed and pasteurized milk using membrane filtration. The company says MGL's MCC 881 contains 88% protein and delivers amino acids to the bloodstream for up to seven hours after one serving.Gaspari's MyoPure 100% Pure Micellar Casein will be available in three different variants: Chocolate Ice Cream, Vanilla Ice Cream.Gaspari Nutrition has also re-launched several products, including Halodrol, Novedex XT, Plasmajet, and SuperPump 250, and plans to launch several more in the coming months, including a new, patented IGF-1 product for night-time recovery.Cow Candy is a fruit-flavored Monterey Jack cheese available in the US in five different flavors including: fruit punch jack, grape jack, honey jack, orange jack and strawberry jack cheese. Each pack contains 15% of the daily value of calcium, 4 grams of protein and 1 to 2 grams of sugar per serving."As a parent, it can be difficult to find a healthy, easy-to-serve snack that competes with candy," said Cow Candy founder Danyel O'Connor."This struggle led to the creation of Cow Candy.”Each pack contains eight servings and retails for under $6 and is made with Wisconsin cheese.Ezra, a clothbound cheddar aged in caves, has been created in a collaboration between Murray’s Cheese, Cornell University, and Old Chatham Creamery in New York. It is named after the university’s founder, Ezra Cornell.Ezra is the product of two years of R&D by Murray’s Cheese by “cavemasters” PJ Jenkelunas and Sr VP Steve Millard.“American cheddar tends to run down a sweet/sulfurous path.  This cheese very much decidedly goes in a different direction toward a wonderfully bright and acidic path with notes of lemon curd and a slight hint of sweet caramel,” Millard said.Ezra cave-aged cheddar is available in Murray’s Cheese New York retail locations.After five years of development, Food-tech startup Plasma Nutrition has launched a series of products featuring ioProtein, a new and improved type of whey protein, in co-branded partnership with PERFORMIX.The enhancement is the result of Plasma Nutrition’s Ingredient Optimization technology (patent-pending), which makes it possible to change several functional characteristics of protein on a commercial scale, altering the way they are absorbed and utilized by the body.“Changing the structure of proteins is not a new thing in itself,” Plasma Nutrition co-founder Stephen Motosko, said.“But so far it’s always been done in a lab environment, five grams at a time. Scaling the process and making it economically viable is something no one has ever tried to do before.”In the US, in support of the Association of Zoos and Aquariums’ (AZA) SAFE: Saving Animals From Extinction, program, Stonyfield organic yogurt will feature the African penguin and other endangered species on various Stonyfield YoKids packaging this year.The packaging is for kids to collect, and also features an on-pack offer to get families out to visit AZA member zoos and aquariums in their communities. “Each year Stonyfield keeps over 185,000 pounds of toxic persistent pesticides out of the environment, helping to safeguard species and their ecosystems,” Andy Sundberg, Stonyfield YoKids Senior Brand Manager, said.Mars has introduced individually-wrapped M&Ms Ice Cream Bars to the US, featuring M&Ms chocolate and reduced-fat vanilla ice cream covered in milk chocolate.M&Ms Ice Cream Bars, packaged in six-bar boxes, are sold in major grocery and convenience stores for $3.99, and 2.64-ounce single bars retail for $1.79.Arla introduced its new Medium Cheddar slices to its US range of cheese slices.It is available at grocery retailers nationwide and is free from added rBST growth hormones, artificial flavors, and artificial preservatives."American's eat more than 2bn grilled cheese sandwiches each year," Don Stohrer Jr., CEO of Arla Foods, said. "We want to support that.”Talenti has launched a dairy-free peanut butter fudge sorbetto made from milk-free peanut butter sorbetto with a swirl of dairy free fudge, and 30% peanut butter.Talenti has also released three new gelato flavors, which contain dairy including: vanilla chai, cinnamon peach biscuit, and vanilla blueberry crumble.The new dairy free sorbetto is available in major retailers in the US for an SRP of $5 per pint.  Østavind in slices and piecesIn Norway, TINE has launched Østavind, a new cheese the company says is equally suitable for bread slices as for cooking and snacks.Junior Fløtemysost with ironTINE's cream cheese is now available with added iron, as Junior Fløtemysost. This naturally sweet cheese, with no added sugar, is specifically designed for growing children.TINE LettA new concentrated acidified/sour milk, TINE Lett 2%, has been launched by TINE for consumers concerned with light and more protein rich products.Litago & Stratos MilkshakeLitago and Stratos are cows with many followers in social media, now Litago Milkshake with a chocolate flavour has been launched.Go'morgen ZERO Strawberry & Lime 190gThe Go'morgen yogurt ZERO is now available in strawberry with diced lime topped with muesli. The product has no added sugar, and is sweetened only by natural sugars found in the milk and fruit. 
DairyReporter presents its monthly round-up of new appointments from the dairy industry.If you have any appointments to announce, please send them to us here , along with a photo.Natalia Gelshtein-Kiss has been appointed CEO of Danone Romania, Bulgaria and the Adriatic.Gelshtein-Kiss replaces Adrian Pascu, recently promoted to vice president commercial Danone Russia, dairy division.Gelshtein-Kiss has extensive experience in various positions within Danone since 2003. Last year she simultaneously held the positions of director of the Moscow City unit, and regional sales director for Moscow, and was director of sales in Ukraine and Czechia for a period of seven years.A new CEO has been announced at Nexus A/S, the independent research and innovation center whose discoveries lead to the emulsifiers and stabilizers of Danish-based ingredients company Palsgaard A/S.Nexus CEO Viggo Norn, who has led the company for over 25 years, will officially be replaced by Claus Hviid Christensen.Educated as a chemist, Claus has experience both as a senior executive in large and small technology enterprises, and as a full professor in a lengthy and international academic careerGiampaolo ManzonettoAlbalact Romania, part of the Lactalis group, has announced Giampaolo Manzonetto as its new general manager.Manzonetto, who also serves as general manager of Lactalis Romania and Parmalat Romania, will now run the entire business of Lactalis Group in Romania.Manzonetto started his management career in the Parmalat team in Russia in 1998, and since 2003 has been working in Romania, where he became general manager of Parmalat in 2007. In 2014, he took over management of Lactalis Romania, Dorna and Parmalat.Irina MăndoiuIrina Măndoiu, commercial manager of Albalact, takes over the position of deputy general manager of Albalact and shall run the businesses of the company.She has been working at Albalact since 2005, when she started as trade marketing manager.Albalact, which has a history of more than 40 years in the Romanian dairy industry, joined Lactalis Group in September 2016.Kerry Group’s taste and nutrition division has announced the appointment of Malcom Sheil as president and CEO of its business in Europe.Sheil joined Kerry as a graduate accountant from Dublin City University in 1988. He spent three years in the US as plant controller and corporate commercial controller, before his promotion to finance director for Kerry Mexico and then to finance director for Kerry South America in 1998.In 2003, he was appointed president of Kerry’s LATAM business and served in that role for 13 years.In Danone’s Q1 financial results issued this month, a new North American strategic business unit, DanoneWave was created, in the wake of Danone’s takeover of WhiteWave.Blaine McPeak, WhiteWave’s former chief operating officer (COO), has been appointed COO of DanoneWave effective as of the closing date.McPeak will be responsible for the business operations, building, commercializing and implementing the strategic growth plans of the new entity.  DanoneWave has also formed an external advisory committee and appointed Patagonia CEO, Rose Marcario, as the head chair.Other advisory committee members, each appointed to a three-year term, are: Michelle Goolsby, venture partner of Greenmont Capital Partners and board chair of Vitamin Angels; Mac Macartney, author, speaker and change-maker; Simin Meydani, D.V.M., Ph. D., Vice Provost for Research, Tufts University; Emeran Mayer, MD, PhD, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA; and Marcello Palazzi of B-Lab Europe. Christopher RoyToray Plastics (America), manufacturer of rigid plastic packaging for the dairy industry, has promoted Christopher Roy to senior vice president and general manager of the Torayfan Division.The company also named John Eustis as the new vice president of engineering and procurement.Roy joined Toray in 1998 and has held several positions, including director of national sales, director of sales and marketing, senior director of sales and marketing, and general manager.John EustisPrior to joining Toray, Roy launched his career in the plastics industry working in the injection molding segment for seven years as a vice president.Eustis was appointed senior director of procurement and logistics in 2010. In 2014 Eustis also assumed responsibility for leading the company’s engineering team.He joined Toray in 2008 after working at Pearson Composites, where he was a vice president. Eustis holds a B.S. in Materials Engineering from Brown University and an M.S. in Management and an M.S. in Materials Science and Engineering from MIT.Allen Merrill, a dairy farmer from Parker, South Dakota, is the new chairman of Midwest Dairy Association, elected during the organization’s annual meeting held in conjunction with the Western Dairy Forum in Phoenix, Arizona. Merrill previously served as first vice chairman. He replaces Jerry Messer of Richardton, North Dakota, who stepped down after serving as chairman for nine years.New members of the Corporate board officer team are Charles Krause, Buffalo, Minnesota, first vice chairman; and Lowell Mueller, Hooper, Nebraska, secretary. Bill Siebenborn, Trenton, Missouri, was re-elected second vice chairman while Dan Grunhovd, Gary, Minnesota, was re-elected treasurer.By a large majority, Trond Reierstad was re-elected as chairman of TINE SA during the company’s annual meeting in Lillestrøm.Two new members have been appointed to the group board, Elisabeth Irgens Hokstad and Helge Arne Espeland.Reierstad, 59, is a dairy farmer from Lørenskog, and has been chairman of TINE SA since 2010.The company’s employees also have four representatives on the board.Elisabeth Irgens Hokstad and Helge Arne Espeland 
Sodium reduction is high on the agenda for many food manufacturers globally. In response to industry trends,Scelta Mushroomsare continuously developing their Scelta Taste Accelerator line which they believe has the answer to aiding the food industry in the quest to lower sodium intake without losing taste through the natural power of umami.FoodIngredientsFirstrecently spoke with Jan Klerken Junior, who has been with the family-run company for almost ten years. “Our Scelta Taste Accelerator line is something that we are fiercely promoting,” he explains. “We are continuously looking for market opportunities in this area, and we try to narrow it down more and more into specific sectors, one of which is the snacking category and the other is savory in general, such as soups and sauces. At Scelta, we are trying to really focus on and try and create new products for our final customers by finding the right solutions for them.”“The European market is a key focus area for us currently but we are also looking to pursue areas outside of Europe and to break those markets there, too,” he notes. “The entire world is screaming for clean label solutions at this moment in time and I do believe that our Scelta Taste Accelerator line appeals to these needs.”“Our umami extracts are a rich source of glutamate, which is obviously very well known within the industry as the perfect taste enhancer,” Klerken Junior explains. “Glutamate occurs naturally in mushrooms, so we try to capture all these elements together with the rest of the matrix, and find a solution to add to that umami flavor, which can decrease the sodium impact, but which overall gives a higher taste accessibility to the end consumer and that is exactly what we are targeting.”Scelta are undergoing further research in this area and exploring the possibilities of using mushrooms as a taste enhancer in final products. Sodium reduction is important and according to Klerken Junior it can be achieved through getting a higher taste accessibility. Furthermore, Umami flavor compounds, which are naturally present in mushrooms have the ability to improve the palatability and increase perceived saltiness. It makes Scelta Mushrooms’ line of umami-rich extracts a powerful, natural alternative to MSG/I+G/AYE, but also sodium reduction tool. Sodium reductions of up to 50% have been achieved, without compromising taste and function and without the use of potassium. Klerken Junior adds: “These sodium reductions have been achieved through a blend of ingredients, some other items that work better on a functional level. STA for bread, for example, allows for significant sodium reduction while maintaining the function (rise, crumb structure and gluten matrix formation) and taste profile of salt in baked goods. Typically what we are seeing is that the consumer or the producer doesn’t want to take high steps at first and work on reduction levels anywhere between 25 and 35 percent.”The range of categories for Scelta using Scelta Taste Accelerator ranges from processed meats to snacking products, bakery to soups, sauces, and more recently there are even opportunities in the confectionery segments. “Depending on the matrix of the product, innovation in confectionery is something that we have the ability to look into but it’s also very challenging because we are still learning how to deal with it. There is progress being made in that area but it’s still early days,” he states. Savory applications are where we are most advanced, because we know exactly what to expect – confectionery is still a fairly new area for us.”Klerken Junior commented further: “People are discovering mushroom extracts more and more, if you look at the industry, only a couple of years back, mushroom extracts were only used for having a flavor impact in mushroom soups and sauces. Nowadays, it definitely goes further than that. Although created on the basis of mushrooms, with Scelta Taste Accelerator we have succeeded to reduce the distinct mushroom flavor from these extracts, without using chemical processes. The product can be declared as natural aroma and can be used for its taste enhancing characteristics in many different savory solutions.”There are plenty of opportunities in various application categories and Scelta Taste Accelerator is a versatile ingredient – this is evident in product development globally over the last few years.Another area that Scelta see significant growth is the supplements and nutraceutical sectors. Again, it is something that is fairly new for the company, in terms of product development, but according to Klerken Junior, there has been a lot of research in that area and some indication that rebranding is on the horizon. He says: “We have a commercial product available at the moment and there are discussions around expanding the range of products with more application formats: not only simple pills but to also look into different types of delivery models and on the other hand, to look closely at the variety of mushrooms that can have a more beneficial impact for consumers.”“For the supplements and nutraceuticals, we are sourcing only one type of mushroom which is the agaricus blazei murill mushroom, however, we are looking to expand that range slowly, steadily and at least grow the range by up to 12 to 15 more species. We are currently working with multiple universities to research the benefits of different species of mushrooms, including tropical mushrooms,” he confirms.It’s not only food research that Scelta see as a priority. Research into the health benefits of mushrooms  is something that is increasingly on the agenda for the company. “Something that has recently come to our attention and that we have been doing a lot of research into is the Vitamin D content of mushrooms and those extracts as well,” he says. “The entire world is Vitamin D deficient, and if you look at those concentrates there are huge opportunities to increase the levels of Vitamin D from a natural source that your body can reap the benefits from.”Which category has most growth potential for mushrooms concentrates? “I believe products with added Vitamin D, for us,” notes Klerken Junior. “As soon as we have these available I think it will most likely be products that are consumed on a regular basis – such a bakery, but even also ready meals, and those kind of categories, because people who don’t have the time or knowledge can really benefit from mushrooms extracts as an ingredient, and we can target these consumers to become more healthy.”Klerken Junior continues: “We are now looking at mushrooms, not only as a salt and flavor enhancer but also with added health benefits too. We believe, of course, that taste is very important chapter in the food base, and of course you see that from the industry as well.”“If you look at all the new flavors coming out, every single ingredient manufacture has huge diversity in that compared to a couple of years ago. For Scelta, we are eyeing trends that are likely to be the top trends two years from now, we have forward thinking way of working.”“Looking into the future we believe Personalized Nutrition is going to be one of the major trends in the market,” he finalizes, “With mushrooms extracts and concentrates you can add functional benefits to consumer products in this category that are certainly valuable to the end consumer.”by Elizabeth Green
erryis eyeing dynamic organic growth opportunities in continental Europe, as well as a major global acquisition in the next 18 months. Despite the challenges that Brexit presents for a company with a massive UK footprint,Kerryhas orchestrated scenario planning and is prepared for the headwinds that the UK exit from the EU will bring. This is according to theKerryGroup’s new Taste and Nutrition Division President and CEO of Europe, Malcolm Sheil, who has just been permanently appointed to the role, following several months of serving as Interim President.In a detailed interview withFoodIngredientsFirst, Sheil confirmed aggressive organic expansion plans in continental Europe that go: “from Portugal to Russia.” “From an organic standpoint a lot of our European business has historically been UK and Ireland based,” he notes. “But now we are increasingly looking to the continent; all the way from getting our local application labs on-stream and sales forces on the ground. We are looking at it from the standpoint of footprint to supply those customers as well,” Sheil adds.He notes that Kerry already has several factories in mainland Europe at the moment and is quite well positioned between Spain, Italy, France, Germany, Italy and Poland. They are also currently building a site in Russia. “But we definitely see that we will be putting more sites on the ground for both applications and production, in the following months and years,” he adds.Click to EnlargeKerry Group today is a world leader in Taste & Nutrition serving the food, beverage and pharmaceutical industries and a leading consumer foods processing and marketing organization in selected EU markets. With sales to over 140 countries worldwide, Kerry has grown to become a highly successful public company, having achieved sustained profitable growth with current annualized sales in excess of €6 billion. Launched as a public company in 1986, the market capitalization of the Group has grown to the current level of approximately €14 billion. Kerry Group now employs over 23,000 people throughout its worldwide activities and operations. Photo Shows (L-R):Olivier Picard, GM Russia; Michele Van Der Walt, VP Commercial Sales, UK & Ireland; Patrick Cooney, CFO, Kerry Europe; Mike Doyle, COO, Kerry Europe; Malcolm Sheil, President & CEO, Kerry Europe; Catherine Keogh, VP Strategic Marketing & Business Planning; Oliver Kelly, VP Global Accounts; Juan Aguiriano, VP Commercial Sales, Europe; Kate Brosnan, VP Human Resources; Philip O’Connor, Business President, Meat; Martin Stiegler, VP Food & Beverage Systems.Kerry has historically grown through acquisitions and growth from this regard will continue too. “We will always look at acquisitions to take us into growth areas where we are not yet present, or to accelerate our growth in them. We are definitely active in this regard, but it takes two to tango and somebody must be willing to sell,” Sheil notes. “It is definitely a major part of our plan going forward and we would definitely like to see some activity going forward into later-2017 and into 2018,” he explains.An acquisition would likely be of a company with a global footprint that can easily to be integrated into the organization. “We have a very healthy balance sheet. We have gone through the ‘Kerry Connect’ process of making the organization from an internal standpoint, a global organization. So we feel very comfortable now that we could take in a major acquisition, both system-wise and people/structure/organization-wise and really get the value out of a major acquisition at this point. Most of these companies would have footprints across the globe,” he adds.The UK accounts for a significant part of Kerry’s business, with the company operating as the largest food & flavoring systems business in the UK. But Sheil stresses that increased moves in continental Europe would not result in the company moving any of their facilities away from the UK as a result of Brexit.“We do see good opportunities in the UK as well and we are not moving things elsewhere. From a production standpoint, we need to get things closer on the ground and deliver on opportunities in mainland Europe,” he notes, as the company evolves from being quite UK and Ireland-centric. “We have been a bit more inward looking than we could have been. We really have a solid base now to grow our business organically, so now we can leverage with our customers to help them grow. It’s a dynamic food & beverage marketplace. This is where we strive so that we can move with the marketplace, whether from a regional, trends or delivery standpoint,” he says.Brexit is obviously a major concern for the company, with scenario work at play. “When it comes to Brexit, we obviously have quite a large footprint in the UK. We have a global supply chain as well and are very used to sourcing different raw materials from around the world,” Sheil says.“We have done a huge amount of scenario work on our customers’ current business and how to help them through this period of uncertainty and post-Brexit. We are confident that we are very well positioned to be able to maneuver as required, depending on what the outcome of Brexit is. That is both for supplying back into the UK and for manufacturing in the UK and exporting back into mainland Europe,” he adds.Scenario planning is customer specific, but there are general areas to consider. “We would be looking at it from raw material supply standpoint and as to whether WTO [regulations would] be applicable? Will there be a continuation of the current tariff quotes between mainland Europe and the UK? Will there be different tariffs between the North and Republic of Ireland?” he notes.Kerry has also been looking at inward processing requirements between different countries. “We have been looking at if the UK adopts a NAFTA style agreement with other countries, how would that work? We are leveraging our global knowledge on how regulatory works from an import/export standpoint and also from a labeling perspective, in terms of regulation. We know European legislation quite well, but we also know North American and APAC regulation quite well. So if something were to change, we could work out what it may look out,” he notes.From a company standpoint, Sheil admits that the ideal [and unlikely] scenario would be that post-Brexit, free trade continues, regulation doesn’t change and labeling stays the same. “That is what we are supporting with the Food and Drink Federation in the UK etc., but we are saying that we need to ready in terms of what comes next and that we are quite comfortable in whatever the scenarios are. It will obviously cause work, but we are used to working hard and not afraid of it,” he quips.Malcolm Sheil joined Kerry as a Graduate Accountant from Dublin City University in 1988. He spent three years in the U.S. as Plant Controller and Corporate Commercial Controller, before his promotion to Finance Director for Kerry Mexico and then to Finance Director for Kerry South America in 1998. In 2003, Malcolm was appointed President of Kerry’s LATAM business and served in that role for 13 years. He returned to Ireland recently, after being appointed President & CEO of Kerry Europe.Commenting on his appointment, Sheil said: “It is a very exciting time for our industry as we continue to respond to and provide solutions to the evolving demands and requirements of consumers across Europe. Our food and beverage heritage has helped position us strongly as our technologies and systems allow us to create customized solutions for our customers. The taste and nutrition of products are intricately linked and we will continue to invest heavily in research and development to ensure that we can bring tasty and nutritious solutions to our growing client base.”Innovation is promised at the company. For example, Kerry has leveraged its half a century of dairy protein expertise, and combined it with cutting edge nutritional science to create ProDiem, a complementary combination of plant proteins including pea, rice and oat to improve the protein digestibility-corrected amino acid score (PDCAAS), delivering a solution with a complete essential amino acid profile. The PDCAAS score has been independently verified by a leading laboratory, confirming that with a score of as high as 1.0 it matches that of the best animal protein sources.In creating ProDiem, Kerry has successfully pushed past the limitations of traditional plant based proteins, providing a plant based protein that is optimized for nutrition, texture and taste. ProDiem is a great option for soy-free, non-dairy and vegan protein and is available to boost the nutritional content of beverages, bar and snack applications.ProDiem proteins are also available as part of Kerry’s specialist Total Novel Texture (TNT) range, which is specifically designed for nutritional bar and snack applications. A common problem for protein fortified bars is hardening over time, however TNT offers the significant value of greatly reducing bar hardening over shelf life as well as enhancing the textural attributes of bars and improving the overall taste.The product will be shown at Vitafoods Europe in Geneva next week.By Robin Wyers
DSM is reporting a robust first quarter with sales up 13% to €2.159 million (US$2.35 million) and a strong input from nutrition.According to the Q1 figures for 2017, the Netherlands-based Royal DSM - a global science-based company active in health, nutrition and materials - has net profit up 75% to €149 million (US$162 million) and is forecasting a strong outlook throughout 2017.Cash from operating activities is up 43% to €196m (US$213 million), organic growth is up 9%, while adjusted EBITDA up 17% to €345 million (US$376 million)."We are pleased to report a very good start to the year, with continued positive momentum in all businesses as we execute on our mid-term strategic and financial ambitions,” saysFeike Sijbesma, CEO/Chairman of the DSM Managing Board.“Nutrition continued to deliver on its objectives with good growth from Animal and Human Nutrition. Materials demonstrated once again the benefit of its focus on specialties. Both businesses achieved strong volume growth, well above the market.”According to DSM, Q1 2017 sales increased by 12% compared to the same period the previous year, driven predominantly by organic growth of 8%. Volume growth continued to be good across all business lines, with both animal and human nutrition benefiting in part from timing of sales between quarters. Higher prices were driven by animal nutrition. Exchange rates had a 4% positive effect, mainly coming from a stronger US dollar and Brazilian real.Q1 2017 Adjusted EBITDA was €257 million, up 14% compared to Q1 2016, resulting from good organic growth and the profit improvement programs. Currencies had a positive effect with the stronger US dollar and Brazilian real, partly offset by the stronger Swiss franc.Q1 2017 Adjusted EBITDA margin was 18.4%, up from 18.0% in Q1 2016, it adds.Sales development in nutrition and health were 10% higher compared to Q1 2016 driven predominantly by higher volumes, with good growth across all regions and market segments, well above the market.The reported volume growth in human nutrition in the quarter benefited from additional vitamin C volumes that could not be delivered in Q4. Normalized for this effect, Q1 2017 volume growth was about 5%. Prices were slightly down with lower contractual prices in Infant Nutrition and a product mix effect. Exchange rates had a positive effect led by the stronger US dollar.And in food specialties, first quarter sales showed solid organic growth in enzymes, cultures and savory ingredients, while hydrocolloids had a weaker quarter.“Notwithstanding the current global socio-economic volatility, we are confident that we will be able to deliver against our full-year objectives given our focus on improving our financial performance through our growth initiatives and our extensive and ambitious profit improvement programs. At the same time we continue to manage our business for the longer term by pursuing our innovation-driven growth strategy,” adds Sijbesma.
PROVA Inc., has announced the launch of NATURAL PROVANIL-US7, a technological, economical and consumer-preferred alternative to natural vanillin which was specially designed for high-fat systems and products undergoing high baking temperatures.Bill Graham, Vice President Sales North America at PROVA said that the use level of NATURAL PROVANIL-US7 is the same – or even lower – than that of natural vanillin. He added: “Hand-in-hand with this cost-in-use advantage, there are strong technical benefits. The finer crystals that comprise NATURAL PROVANIL-US7 allow for a higher degree of dispersion, without pre-dilution, resulting in a better flavoring yield while improving fat solubility and contributing to better heat resistance.” Graham also noted that NATURAL PROVANIL-US7 meets manufacturer and consumer demand for clean labels and natural ingredients.“Our technical team has brought together technology and affordability in NATURAL PROVANIL-US7, making it the ideal natural vanillin alternative for chocolate, compound coating, bakery, biscuit dough, fat fillings, cereals and other applications,” said Graham. He emphasized that the PROVANIL brand has been proven effective in the marketplace, with decades of use in commercialized products worldwide.Graham encouraged sample requests and noted that customers can experience the benefits of NATURAL PROVANIL-US7 for themselves, with technical support. “Our customers have the assurance that a member of PROVA’s technical team will be available to work side-by-side with them in developing formulations that feature NATURAL PROVANIL-US7 as a natural vanillin alternative.”
Koch Membrane Systems (KMS), a leader in membrane filtration technologies, announced in conjunction with Archer Daniel Midlands Company (ADM) the planned upgrade of the water treatment plant for ADM’s Southern Cellulose facility in Chattanooga, TN.The facility, which processes cotton fiber to produce rolled cellulose, intends to replace their aging settling ponds, clarifier and sand filtration treatment system with a KMS’ PURON HF submerged ultrafiltration system.  The KMS system is designed to produce higher quality process water and reduce the discharged waste stream of the Chattanooga site.The upgraded facility is designed to produce a continuous flow of 1,400 gpm (a little over 2 million gallons per day) from a mixed stream consisting of 20% recycled whitewater and 80% well water. The whitewater presented a challenging recycle stream due to the presence of fibrous residuals that have the potential to clog a standard hollow fiber membrane. The PURON HF submerged membrane product offers a unique solution to this problem through the single header design.  This design feature permits the sealed top end of the fibers to float freely, removing the potential to clog underneath a top permeate header.“The innovative design of Koch’s submerged hollow fiber membrane system was the deciding factor in our decision to purchase the Koch system,” said Mark Carroll, water resource engineer with Archer Daniels Midland Company. “Their system uses a single header design with the fibers potted in only at the bottom and scour air nozzles centrally located in each of the circular fiber bundles.”In addition to the single header design, the PURON HF product exhibits other unique attributes that differentiate it from other products in the market, increasing filtration performance significantly over standard systems.  These attributes include a robust membrane, evenly spaced fibers, central aeration system and materials of construction compatible with challenging industrial applications.Manny Singh, president of Koch Membrane Systems added: “Industrial water and wastewater treatment is one of our key focus areas. Our PURON technology has unique features which make it ideally suited to treat challenging industrial water applications. We are glad ADM found value in these differentiators and selected KMS technology as a solution for their problem.”
EU exports reached €10.7 bn in February 2017, an increase of 1.2% compared to last year, says Commission.EU exports continue to increase, with the highest growth being reported for exports to Russia, China, the USA and Korea. However, exports to Saudi Arabia have fallen by €94 m compared to figures from last year, according to a report published by the European Commission. The highest figures were seen for exports of wine and pigmeat, where pig meat exports increased by 20.5% compared to February 2016.On the other end of the spectrum, figures for the export of wheat and other cereals are reducing in value terms.Imports were also on the rise, especially coming from Brazil and Indonesia, with coffee and vegetables in the top categories.The report also gave focus to the EU’s trade relationship with Serbia, saying exports have been increasing slowly after the past few years.“While the EU is more orientated towards exporting processed products, the imports from Serbia are mainly commodities and other primary products,” the report stated.In 2016, the highest Serbian-EU imports were for fresh or dried fruit, cereals, sugar and vegetable oils, whereas the highest exports were for food preparations, chocolate and confectionery.As the overall monthly EU exports and imports increased by the same value, the trade balance for February 2017 shows no change compared to February 2016. 
When I speak to Fonterra’s Hamish Gowans, he had just been asked by a potential customer if the cows that produce the milk for the New Zealand dairy ingredients co-operative are fed on grass. There’s little in Fonterra’s corporate branding to suggests otherwise. The deep green that it incorporates into its logo sums up New Zealand’s dairyland, as do the countless images of happy cows in verdant pastures that the brand puts out to reinforce the country's clean, green credentials. Anyone who had visited New Zealand’s green and pleasant land would not have asked.For Gowans, it was less a misguided inquiry than a suggestion that dairy provenance is becoming more important for food and drink manufacturers in south and east Asia, his customers.“There is confidence in the quality of dairy products in the region, regardless of who supplies them. But there is also an interest in where a product comes from, and how it can be managed in the supply chain,” he says.At the same time, there has been strong regional recognition of the importance of dairy fat in a diet relative to previous misconceptions about the harm it could cause to the cardiovascular system, he adds.As regional general manager for Fonterra's NZMP ingredients division, Gowans has been witnessing Asia's market tastes and awareness evolving quickly, putting business on a consistently upwards slope. In some market categories, including nutritionals, NZMP has seen high double-digit growth, he says.“When you look at satiety, healthy ageing or muscle maintenance, people are living longer, are more active for longer. This is well recognised in other parts of the world so the lessons of healthy, safe nutrition has been starting to filter down to south and east Asia. “You will see pockets of it popping up. Customers are now starting to talk about protein and the reasons for protein in a diet. It’s healthy whole food in a dairy format that is working so well,” says Gowans.NZMP ships ingredients for active nutrition, dairy foods and beverages and consumer powders to over 100 customers in south and east Asia, with the key markets being Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore Vietnam and Thailand. Strong growth is also coming from less developed markets like Bhutan, Nepal and Sri Lanka.“We have very clearly focused on where we want to play, based on the categories that are moving strongly where our customers play,” says Gowans.South and east Asia is a big market that takes in the region of 660,000 tonnes of NZMP ingredients. It is diverse, ranging from countries like Bangladesh, with low GDPs, through to wealthy Singapore. And so the product evolutions the company deals with vary from the very basic, like recombined sweetened condensed milk and repacked whole milk powder, to high-functional medical nutrition products.  For a sales region so vast, NZMP has been set on communicating more strongly with its customers while financing supply chains and opening a new warehouse in Singapore.“New Zealand is a long way away from our customers, so we look at how we get our product closer to our customers to service short-term demand, and how we build on top of our supply chain solutions to engage with customers,” says Gowans.He says that global volatility in the dairy market “is here to stay”, and to mitigate this the company has been working closely with its customers around Fonterra’s commodity risk and trading platform. “We work with them as well as our farmers to help reduce this volatility,” he adds. Asked to tip the next big market surge for dairy ingredients in Southeast Asia, he suggests this would be sports nutrition—albeit starting from a low starting point.He says that some of the larger local players in the region think they can hear a rush from sports nutrition on the back of trends from American.“Is it here in a major way yet? No, but they can hear it coming and want to know how they can position themselves for the future.”Elsewhere some of the less developed markets are moving to more fluid formats of milk like UHT and even fresher. Cheese and butter have been performing well in the food service category, while consumer powders continue to grow strongly, especially in Sri Lanka and Bangladesh.And customers are looking at how they differentiate themselves, to “premiumise" their products, Gowans adds. “Where we can we add value to them as well as to the New Zealand farmer or shareholder, so we have solutions across the board.” 
Murray Goulburn Co-operative Co. Limited (MG) has announced it is closing three of its facilities after an asset and footprint review.The closures are expected to affect 360 staff.The Australian company said the recent review was a response to reduced milk intake across the network, as it continues efforts to address its cost base, improve efficiencies and increase earnings and farmgate milk pricing.The company said it will close its Edith Creek facility by Q2 FY18, the Rochester facility by Q3 FY18 and the MG facility at Kiewa by Q1 FY19.The Rochester and Kiewa closures will begin in August 2017.MG said that once completed the closures will deliver an annualized net financial benefit of A$40m-A$50m (US$30m-37m).MG expects to spend A$60m (US$45m) of capital expenditure to enable the closures, which will be largely funded by maintenance capital expenditure no longer required at the sites.MG will write-down assets of A$99m ($US74m) and expects to incur cash restructuring costs of approximately A$37m (US$28m).In order to mitigate the risk of further milk loss, MG also announced it will forgive the MSSP. All future repayments of the MSSP, due to recommence in July 2017, will cease.As a result, MG will record a write-down of this asset of A$148m (US$110m).Following the completion of the review, MG said it does not currently intend to proceed with the proposed major capital investments in dairy beverages and nutritionals.MG said it has also suspended dividend payments with immediate effect including the final FY17 dividend, in order to generate additional capital to support the balance sheet.MG’s chief executive, Ari Mervis, said that while the company was aware of the impact the decisions would have, the changes were necessary.“They are necessary steps on the journey to ensure the future strength and competitiveness of Murray Goulburn,” Mervis said.“A strong MG is of fundamental importance to the Australian dairy industry and these decisions are necessary to lay the foundation for the future.”MG’s announcement comes shortly after the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) instituted proceedings in the Federal Court against MG, alleging it engaged in unconscionable conduct and made false or misleading representations in contravention of the Australian Consumer Law.The ACCC also alleged former managing director Gary Helou and former chief financial officer Bradley Hingle were knowingly concerned in MG’s conduct.“The allegations relate to representations made by Murray Goulburn  to its Southern Milk Region dairy farmers between June 2015 and April 2016 about the average farmgate milk price (FMP) it expected to pay them during financial year 2015/16 (FY16),” ACCC chairman Rod Sims said.“The ACCC alleges that Murray Goulburn’s conduct had an adverse impact on many farmers who, as a result of Murray Goulburn’s representations regarding the farmgate milk price, had made business decisions.” The farmers relied on MG’s representations, and were not expecting a substantial reduction in the farmgate milk price, Sims said, noting that as it was close to the end of the season it was not possible for them to practically readjust their expenditure.Knew that farmers relied on information about the opening FMP and forecast Final FMP to make significant business decisions during the financial year;Was aware that many farmers were unable to easily switch milk processors, particularly those contracted to MG;Created an expectation that the opening FMP would be set conservatively and would be a minimum price, and that the final FMP would be higher than the opening price;Knew that farmers expected that it would update the forecast Final FMP regularly to reflect material changes;Provided and maintained FMP forecasts despite knowing that these forecasts were overstated and unachievable in FY16 and that farmers were making decisions in reliance on these forecasts.The ACCC alleges that from June 2015 until February 2016, MG misled farmers by representing that it had a reasonable basis for setting and maintaining an opening FMP of A$5.60 (US$4.19) per kilogram of milk solids (kgms) and a forecast Final FMP of A$6.05/kgms (US$4.53), and that it considered the forecast Final FMP of A$6.05/kgms was the most likely outcome for FY16, when that was not the case.Further, the ACCC alleges that from February 2016 until April 2016, MG misled farmers by representing it had a reasonable basis for expecting to be able to maintain its opening FMP of $5.60/kgms for the remainder of the season, and that it considered a Final FMP of $5.60/kgms was the most likely outcome for FY16, when that was not in fact the case.The ACCC is seeking orders against MG that include declarations, compliance program orders, corrective notices and costs.The ACCC said it will not seek a pecuniary penalty against MG because, as a co-operative, any penalty could directly impact affected farmers.The ACCC is seeking declarations, pecuniary penalties, disqualification orders and costs against Helou and Hingle.MG said in a statement it is considering the proceedings, however noted that ACCC has decided not to seek a pecuniary penalty against MG. 
The Dairy Council in the UK is looking for the next generation of sport nutritionists to submit their research on the role of dairy in sport and exercise nutrition. The 2017 Dairy Council Sport Nutrition Award, in collaboration with the British Dietetic Association’s Sport and Exercise Nutrition register (SENr), is open to nutrition and sport students, and SENr registered graduates.Applicants must compose a formal, evidence-based article on the use of milk or dairy foods in sport nutrition and elite performance. This can be in the format of a dissertation, case study or literature review.Lydia Cooper, nutrition scientist at The Dairy Council, said research on milk and dairy and its relationship with exercise and performance nutrition is extensive, and is a growing field of study.She said the award is intended to inspire the next generation of sport nutritionists and researchers to further investigate dairy products.Winners may be invited to present their work at the 2018 SENr showcase event. Entries will be accepted until December 31, and the winners will be announced early 2018.Two prizes will be given for the best entries based on one of the following formats: primary research; case study; and literature review.The competition is open to graduates who are registered with SENr and nutrition and sport students studying at BSc, MSc or PhD levels.Those interested should submit applications to info@dairycouncil.org.uk , clearly marking submissions for the attention of The Dairy Council Award. 
Bosch is showcasing a machine for yogurt packaging that connects to CPI (Connected Packaging Industry) software transferring information to the IoT (Internet of Things) Cloud.CPI is the name of the smart software from Bosch for track & trace. It can manage serialization from the allocation of serial numbers to the last aggregation step.Dr Stefan König, president, Bosch Packaging Technology, told DairyReporter thanks to the QR code printed onto the lid of the yogurt cup, end consumers can verify whether they have bought an original product.“The cloud further enables producers to actively communicate with their customers,” he said.“In case of a faulty product, consumers can immediately inform the manufacturer and support them in securing the quality of their products.”Aside from product verification, manufacturers can use the code for marketing opportunities such as product-specific information such as ingredients, allergens or recipes.At Interpack in Dusseldorf, Germany (May 4-10) Bosch Packaging Technology is showing how Industry 4.0 technology achieves higher process safety and product quality.“The key to safety is transparent and controllable manufacturing processes, which comply with international guidelines,” added König.“Our Industry 4.0 technology is designed to support customers in optimizing their processes – and in making their products safer for end consumers.”Examples at Interpack include CPS (Carton Printing System) modules, which print data matrix codes onto folding cartons, verify the codes and tamper-evident seals.The CPI software integrates the CPS modules into the company IT and detailed information about each machine, line or process status is provided by the Condition Monitoring platform to record data in real-time, allowing maintenance staff to react before cost-intensive process deviations or downtimes occur.  “Industry 4.0 technology from Bosch brings more intelligence into production – from sensors in the machines to software and services. Current machine and line conditions can be retrieved via Condition Monitoring in real-time. Operators receive an overview of parameters such as temperature or rotation speed. In case of deviations, they are able to deduct counter-measures in a timely manner,” added König.“To increase Overall Equipment Effectiveness (OEE), Bosch presents the management and analyses tool Shopfloor Management Cycle with additional Management View function. The latter enables line and production managers to get a good overview of their machines over several facilities at any time, and to carry out continuous process improvements.“A central element for the connectivity of all Bosch’s industry 4.0 solutions is the new Human Machine Interface HMI 4.0. It offers an immediate overview of all production parameters and makes work processes more efficient." 
China’s booming cheese market was worth around RMB3.3bn in 2015 and continues to grow at an annual rate of 20% according to new market research.Both supply and demand have grown constantly in recent years, helped by gradual improvements in production processes, analyst Research and Markets found in its study of competition patterns in the category.Cream cheese, cheddar and mozzarella were found to be in greatest demand by the processing industry and catering sector. Among individual consumers, children and young adults had developed the biggest taste for cheese, while older ones were typically unfamiliar with the dairy product.The consumer charge is being led by re-packed cheese as living standards increase and Western cuisine gains more traction, the analyst said. Though the market has been transforming rapidly, it is still at a very early stage, and demand comes mostly from city residents.Nationally, annual per-capita consumption weighs in at less than 50g—a fraction of the 16kg consumed by Americans in 2015 and 26.8kg eaten by cheese-loving French.The Chinese figure is dwarfed even by neighbouring South Korea, where residents not traditionally known for their consumption of cheese were found to get through a relatively weighty 2.6kg a year. 
German dairy brand Privatmolkerei Naarmann says a novel form of packaging will be central to its strategy as it prepares to begin distribution of UHT milk in Pakistan, the world’s fourth-biggest dairy market, from May. The company will export its food-service milk product to the country in bag-in-box packages fitted with an innovative tap manufactured by International Dispensing Corporation, which Naarmann will have exclusive rights to import into Pakistan. The company promises a six-month shelf life for its shipments and will guarantee 10 days of ambient non-refrigerated dispensing with IDC’s The Answer tap. This device promises to serve UHT liquids while maintaining shelf-stability of remaining contents for an extended time period without refrigeration. The technology is both commercially significant and a global breakthrough for milk preservation and safety, said the family company’s chief executive, Claus Naarmann, citing the breakneck growth of foodservice in the country. Pakistanis currently consume some 40bn litres of milk a year, most of which is unprocessed and often labelled from open vats into plastic bags. With limited refrigeration available in its supply chain, Pakistan would benefit especially from the use of large-format aseptic packaging that allows contents to maintain their safety and integrity without chilling for its entire lifespan, Naarmann said.“Naarmann’s bulk bag-in-box package with The Answer offers not just a cost-competitive solution, but also a unique closed system that is safe, sanitary, and unadulterated.“The Punjab government’s recent campaign to introduce minimum pasteurisation laws makes the timing excellent,” the chief executive added. The company will be targeting local foodservice, home-delivery and the large “loose milk” retail segment. It predicts “significant” volumes based on “commercial acceptance”.“We are very excited about the opportunities that our cost effective packaging solution for high-quality milk will generate in Pakistan, and are gearing up for a long-term presence there,” said Naarman. “The Answer truly is the answer for dairy safety and quality, especially in markets lacking refrigeration.” Greg Abbott, chairman and chief executive of the New York-based packaging research and development company, said IDC’s partnership with Naarmann will be “making history” in South Asia. “We intend to build a robust and flourishing business in Pakistan, to transform this enormous market for the better and make a monumental contribution to food safety,” he added.  
Saudia Dairy and Foodstuff Company (Sadafco) has launched a functional laban fruit drink in the Middle East after demoing the product in the manufacturer's home market.Jump!, produced under its Saudia retail brand, is a vitamin-enriched blend of laban and real fruits, available in strawberry/cheery and mango/apple blends.A form of buttermilk popular in the Gulf, the product is available in 200ml and 900m plastic bottles, and is enriched with vitamins A, B9, D and E.Roberto Bernuy, Sadafco’s marketing manager, said Jump! had been designed to appeal to teenagers in the region, and would be a “fun alternative and a healthier option to carbonated and energy drinks”.“The new product combines the best of both worlds: highly nutritive laban and vitamin-rich fruits,” Bernuy added.The launches in Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait and Qatar follows its appearance on Saudi shelves.“At Sadafco, we have a responsibility toward our consumers to help them lead a healthy life,” Bernuy said, citing a study that found younger consumers were the most likely to buy into health and wellbeing products. “Millennials in particular—those who came of age at the turn of the century—are leading the charge by making health-promoting diet and lifestyle choices a priority,” he added.Sadafco, which has been a main player in Saudi dairy since 1976, is in the process of expanding its beverage portfolio and bringing functional products and “market firsts” to the Middle East.Last August, it announced the launch of Date Milk under the Saudi brand, which would be “the only ready-to-drink milk blended with real dates,” Bernuy said at the time.“Some other milks are artificially flavoured but Saudia Date Milk is the only milk including real dates, ensuring that you get all the flavour and benefits of date milk that you would only get if you made it at home,” he added.It has also targeted health-conscious consumers with Saudia Soy, the “only soy beverage of its kind that is being produced in Saudi Arabia. 
Bel Group last month inaugurated a plant to make The Laughing Cow cheese in Binh Duong province in Vietnam.The new production site, which employs 120 people, will supply the Vietnamese market and supporting Bel's growth in Southeast Asia by producing The Laughing Cow closer to consumers.The new site, which started production in June 2016, produces more than 3m single-serve portions of the Laughing Cow cheese – or Con Bò Cười in Vietnamese - each week.The products not only go to local customers, but are also for the Cambodian, Philippine, Singaporean and Thai markets.The site was built according to Bel’s sustainable plant model, which blends productivity with preserving resources, said Hubert Mayet, general manager of manufacturing and technical operations, research and innovation at Bel.He said an insulation system was installed to reduce energy consumption, as the company constantly looks to improving operating efficiency and meet environmental preservation targets.Bel has its HQ in Ho Chi Minh City, where it has 60 employees. As well as The Laughing Cow, other brands in Vietnam include Belcube, Cheez Dippers, Mini Babybel, and Kiri.Since 2013, Bel has operated a ‘Sharing Cities’ program, an inclusive distribution business model, by developing a network of more than 2,000 street vendors in Ho Chi Minh City.In January 2017, the program was extended to Hanoi.Bel has been present in Vietnam for more than 65 years, and has a sales subsidiary in Ho Chi Minh City, which opened in 2008, and a test-production site, which become operational in 2010. 
Danish-based dairy cooperative Arla Foods recently published its corporate responsibility report 2016, entitled Our Responsibility, documenting the company’s progress on responsible business practice.In the report, CEO Peder Tuborgh said as Arla increases the scale of its international operations, the company acknowledges the impact on societies.The report covers sustainable dairy production, with Arla noting it has decreased its climate impacts by 12.4% compared to 2005 levels, with a 25% goal by 2020.To comply with UN Guiding Principles for Business and Human Rights, Arla conducts human rights assessments to investigate the potential impact of the company’s activities when considering entering into new markets, with products, production or partnerships.In 2016, in-depth human rights assessments were conducted in several markets, including the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Bangladesh and Indonesia.Jesper Colding, who has led Arla’s Business Unit Asia in Malaysia since its inception in 2015, told DairyReporter Arla wants to keep growing its business in a responsible way.“Proposing value added product to the marketplace is what we have in mind and I think we have very interesting ideas on a number of areas where you will see us growing, but we don't just want to grow to grow, or to move milk,” Colding said.Colding said what Arla envisioned in 2015 with the start-up of the unit is what is happening.“I think what we had envisioned a couple of years ago, in terms of the key things we wanted to do and where we would like to be now, is more or less what we're doing.”Colding said while China is ‘the cornerstone of our Asian aspiration,’ the company continues to learn more about the entire region, and “being much closer to the market, we also see key opportunities arising there.”He said it was important to make the right choices, given the size of the region.He pointed to Indonesia, Bangladesh and the Philippines as important markets.“Bangladesh, where we actually have been for a number of years, obviously is a country that is developing. But we've seen very rapid growth in Bangladesh in the past couple of years and we think we can we can do a lot more together with Bangladesh consumers.”Finding the right partners in each market is important, Colding said, adding that they look to “partners who know the market, who have a route to market, and a distribution capability in the market.”In China, Arla has worked with Mengniu since 2012, and has a partner in Bangladesh, and Colding said Arla is looking for partners in the other markets to “really leverage what we can export out of Europe.”As well as exports, Colding said Arla looks to set up local production in some of the markets.Colding said the perception of Arla in Asia, from a consumer standpoint, is a good one.“The acceptance rate is high, there's a high level of trust in Arla – when you double click on the company Arla – and obviously in countries like China where digital and internet penetration is very high and you have 600m consumers on mobile phones – we are only a click away from consumers really investigating who we are,” Colding said.“When consumers look behind the company, they like the story. They like the transparency. “They like that we are really taking care of the milk through the value chain and they like the promise of health and goodness in the simplest way as possible and these type of consumer trends you see in many of the markets where consumers are becoming more affluent.” Colding said the issue is no longer related to consumers feeding the family.“The issue is more lifestyle issues and healthy food choices, where what we're trying do as a company plays well.”While China may be the cornerstone, Colding said there is still relatively low consumption of dairy products there.“I think if you take the cheese market, then it's really early days. What we particularly see is the growth of foodservice and cheese.“We put a cheese innovation center in place in Beijing a couple of years ago that has really worked with understanding consumer preferences, and what that means in terms of our own product development and R&D.”And Colding said knowing what consumers want, and adjusting accordingly, is important to selling products.“Adjusting and refining our own propositions is very much part of what we need to do,” Colding said.“We cannot just export what we have out of Europe and then assume that that's going to satisfy a Chinese consumer. “They are every bit as sophisticated a consumer and very well informed consumer as you would find in for example the UK.” 
Dutch dairy cooperative Royal FrieslandCampina (FrieslandCampina) says it has reached 10,000 households – approximately 50,000 people – in Dawpon Township, Yangon, as part of its campaign to raise awareness of a balanced diet and dairy products, especially among children.The first stage of the campaign, from February to March, included the delivery of food pyramid diagrams identifying the optimal number of servings of vegetables and legumes, meat, fruit, milk, yogurt and cheese to be consumed daily from each of the five basic food groups.The FrieslandCampina team explained the importance of a balanced diet, and provided samples of Dutch Lady milk to families along with a height chart for parents and caregivers to measure the growth of their children.The initiative is part of FrieslandCampina’s Nourishing by Nature mission, through which the company aims to provide nutrition to people around the world, particularly children, by highlighting milk and its essential nutrients.Pascal Bardouil, managing director of FrieslandCampina Myanmar, said the campaign is a step in the company’s commitment to help improve nutritional awareness and help develop milk drinking habits in Myanmar.“We recently conducted an impactful study that found that only one out of 10 Myanmar children consumes milk daily, alarmingly lower than in other Asian markets. This is why our efforts will be focused on bridging this nutritional gap,” Bardouil said.Through its Drink.Move.Be-Strong platform, FrieslandCampina has been promoting physical exercise and the role of milk in a healthy diet across South East Asia. 
Global Dairy Trade (GDT) has announced that Singapore-based milk powder blending manufacturer, Asian Blending, is now offering chocolate and vanilla flavored milk powders on GDT Marketplace.Alan Kent, commercial director SIS and Asian Blending Industrial at Asian Blending, said the company is a long-standing buyer on GDT Marketplace, and now is moving to be a seller as well.“The growth of GDT Marketplace is an exciting development for the dairy industry,” Kent said.“While traditional dairy products such as milk powders, fats and proteins are well established on GDT’s platforms, we are excited to be introducing a new wave of product types. “Our initial product offering will include flavored milk powders with a view to introduce nutritional milk powders and instant coffee mixes in the future.”Asian Blending manufactures food ingredient blends, specializing in the beverage, dairy and confectionery sectors.Eric Hansen, director of GDT, said Asian Blending’s products show the variety of dairy ingredients it is possible to sell on the platform.“We’re pleased to see a non-traditional dairy company using GDT Marketplace, and providing another supply region for buyers of speciality dairy ingredients. “Buyers want more product choice from different regions throughout the world,” Hansen said.Asian Blending commenced sales on GDT Marketplace this month, with a total of five sellers now registered to list products on the platform. 
Regulators in Asia should not wait for new CODEX regulations for infant formula and act now to cut the amount of protein required in order to help reduce obesity, a leading expert in the region has argued.Speaking at our Food Vision Asia summit in Singapore, Danone Nutricia’s Dr Jacques Bindels said there was significant evidence that excessive protein consumption was contributing to infant obesity, putting at risk the gains made in Asia Pacific around stunting and malnutrition.“Upper middle income countries have more than halved their stunting rates in the last 15 years, but there is still more to be done,” he said.“We have also seen reductions in lower middle income and lower income countries too. But we are now seeing a massive increase in obesity.”He cited research showing that the required protein content for infants was far less than current guidelines stipulated.“In some cases children are getting up to up to five times as much protein as they need as this is contributing to obesity, especially for children who are already a little bit chubby.”CODEX is currently working on new guidelines for infant formula, but Bindels urged national regulators to act now.“For example, in Indonesia has both the highest stunting and obesity which really highlights the double burden. We need regulators to act now, not wait for CODEX which in the best case scenario will report in 2020.”Current CODEX regulations cover the age group from six to 36 months, the new ones are likely to be split between six to 12 months for follow-on formulas and the one to three years for young child formulas.Turning his attention to new product development, Bindels said this was likely to target specific health needs, rather than featuring new ingredients which claimed to offer a silver bullet.“We are seeing some developments around symbiotic combinations and synthetic human milk oligosaccharides…but big, meaningful innovations are rare and take long time to convince regulators.“I think innovation is more likely to be driven by specific health benefit needs, rather than by unique ingredients. These will be for high risk groups or people with minor difficulties.” Dr Bindels previously featured in our Nutrition Asia video series to discuss the state of infant nutrition in APAC. You can watch the video here. 
In a bipartisan congressional letter, a group of 68 members of the House of Representatives wrote to US President Donald Trump about the importance of modernizing instead of withdrawing from NAFTA.The National Milk Producers Federation (NMPF), the US Dairy Export Council (USDEC), and the International Dairy Foods Association (IDFA) said the 23-year-old pact is a critically important agreement that needs to be modernized, not withdrawn from, as the US relies on its exports to Canada and Mexico to survive.According to USDEC, the US dairy industry exported approximately 15% of its milk production, worth roughly $5bn. To its NAFTA partners alone, the US exported $1.2bn of dairy products to Mexico and $631m to Canada.“As we conveyed to our Mexican partners in our visit there earlier this year, NAFTA is very important to both our countries and has yielded strong benefits for agriculture,” Michael Dykes, D.V.M., president and CEO of IDFA, wrote.“To build upon that track record, we need to address unfinished business such as the remaining tariff and nontariff trade barriers that Canada has pursued.”The letter comes amid uncertainty of NAFTA’s future as Trump has routinely called the trade agreement a “disaster” and the “worst trade deal in history.” Last week, Trump said he is prepared to “terminate NAFTA” if the US, Canada, and Mexico are unable to renegotiate trade policies.  Trump signed an executive order over the weekend to conduct a study on US trade agreements directed by the US Commerce Department to determine whether or not the US has been treated fairly by its trading partners and the World Trade Organization.“I will hold on the termination, let’s see if we can make it a fair deal because NAFTA’s been a horrible deal for the United States. It’s been very good for Canada. It’s been very good for Mexico because Canada’s been very rough on the United States,” Trump said.US Commerce Department Secretary, Wilbur Ross, said the report on US trade relations will be issued in 180 days.In the letter, US dairy leaders urged Trump to address Canada’s most recent revisions to its milk classification system, which changed in April 2016 when the Canadian province of Ontario implemented a new milk price class, Class 6, which has slashed US exports of ultrafiltered milk.“What happened here was that the Canadian government decided to lower the costs and the price, providing an incentive for processors in Canada to use Canadian products and making it more difficult, in fact, if not impossible for US imports,” USDEC CEO, Tom Vilsack, said.In addition, the US dairy sector said that Canada’s newly-implemented Class 7 National Ingredient Strategy has “displaced current US imports and is poised to negatively impact global milk powder markets.” 
DairyReporter presents its monthly round-up of new appointments from the dairy industry.If you have any appointments to announce, please send them to us here , along with a photo.Natalia Gelshtein-Kiss has been appointed CEO of Danone Romania, Bulgaria and the Adriatic.Gelshtein-Kiss replaces Adrian Pascu, recently promoted to vice president commercial Danone Russia, dairy division.Gelshtein-Kiss has extensive experience in various positions within Danone since 2003. Last year she simultaneously held the positions of director of the Moscow City unit, and regional sales director for Moscow, and was director of sales in Ukraine and Czechia for a period of seven years.A new CEO has been announced at Nexus A/S, the independent research and innovation center whose discoveries lead to the emulsifiers and stabilizers of Danish-based ingredients company Palsgaard A/S.Nexus CEO Viggo Norn, who has led the company for over 25 years, will officially be replaced by Claus Hviid Christensen.Educated as a chemist, Claus has experience both as a senior executive in large and small technology enterprises, and as a full professor in a lengthy and international academic careerGiampaolo ManzonettoAlbalact Romania, part of the Lactalis group, has announced Giampaolo Manzonetto as its new general manager.Manzonetto, who also serves as general manager of Lactalis Romania and Parmalat Romania, will now run the entire business of Lactalis Group in Romania.Manzonetto started his management career in the Parmalat team in Russia in 1998, and since 2003 has been working in Romania, where he became general manager of Parmalat in 2007. In 2014, he took over management of Lactalis Romania, Dorna and Parmalat.Irina MăndoiuIrina Măndoiu, commercial manager of Albalact, takes over the position of deputy general manager of Albalact and shall run the businesses of the company.She has been working at Albalact since 2005, when she started as trade marketing manager.Albalact, which has a history of more than 40 years in the Romanian dairy industry, joined Lactalis Group in September 2016.Kerry Group’s taste and nutrition division has announced the appointment of Malcom Sheil as president and CEO of its business in Europe.Sheil joined Kerry as a graduate accountant from Dublin City University in 1988. He spent three years in the US as plant controller and corporate commercial controller, before his promotion to finance director for Kerry Mexico and then to finance director for Kerry South America in 1998.In 2003, he was appointed president of Kerry’s LATAM business and served in that role for 13 years.In Danone’s Q1 financial results issued this month, a new North American strategic business unit, DanoneWave was created, in the wake of Danone’s takeover of WhiteWave.Blaine McPeak, WhiteWave’s former chief operating officer (COO), has been appointed COO of DanoneWave effective as of the closing date.McPeak will be responsible for the business operations, building, commercializing and implementing the strategic growth plans of the new entity.  DanoneWave has also formed an external advisory committee and appointed Patagonia CEO, Rose Marcario, as the head chair.Other advisory committee members, each appointed to a three-year term, are: Michelle Goolsby, venture partner of Greenmont Capital Partners and board chair of Vitamin Angels; Mac Macartney, author, speaker and change-maker; Simin Meydani, D.V.M., Ph. D., Vice Provost for Research, Tufts University; Emeran Mayer, MD, PhD, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA; and Marcello Palazzi of B-Lab Europe. Christopher RoyToray Plastics (America), manufacturer of rigid plastic packaging for the dairy industry, has promoted Christopher Roy to senior vice president and general manager of the Torayfan Division.The company also named John Eustis as the new vice president of engineering and procurement.Roy joined Toray in 1998 and has held several positions, including director of national sales, director of sales and marketing, senior director of sales and marketing, and general manager.John EustisPrior to joining Toray, Roy launched his career in the plastics industry working in the injection molding segment for seven years as a vice president.Eustis was appointed senior director of procurement and logistics in 2010. In 2014 Eustis also assumed responsibility for leading the company’s engineering team.He joined Toray in 2008 after working at Pearson Composites, where he was a vice president. Eustis holds a B.S. in Materials Engineering from Brown University and an M.S. in Management and an M.S. in Materials Science and Engineering from MIT.Allen Merrill, a dairy farmer from Parker, South Dakota, is the new chairman of Midwest Dairy Association, elected during the organization’s annual meeting held in conjunction with the Western Dairy Forum in Phoenix, Arizona. Merrill previously served as first vice chairman. He replaces Jerry Messer of Richardton, North Dakota, who stepped down after serving as chairman for nine years.New members of the Corporate board officer team are Charles Krause, Buffalo, Minnesota, first vice chairman; and Lowell Mueller, Hooper, Nebraska, secretary. Bill Siebenborn, Trenton, Missouri, was re-elected second vice chairman while Dan Grunhovd, Gary, Minnesota, was re-elected treasurer.By a large majority, Trond Reierstad was re-elected as chairman of TINE SA during the company’s annual meeting in Lillestrøm.Two new members have been appointed to the group board, Elisabeth Irgens Hokstad and Helge Arne Espeland.Reierstad, 59, is a dairy farmer from Lørenskog, and has been chairman of TINE SA since 2010.The company’s employees also have four representatives on the board.Elisabeth Irgens Hokstad and Helge Arne Espeland 
Researchers at the University of Illinois have modified soybeans to yield more when both temperature and carbon dioxide levels increase, which suggests that we might be able to combat heat-related yield loss with genetic engineering.Simplistically, carbon dioxide increases yield and temperature cuts yield; however, this work illustrates that these complex factors work together to influence crop photosynthesis and productivity.By 2050, we will need to feed 2 billion more people on less land. Meanwhile, carbon dioxide levels are predicted to hit 600 parts per million--a 50% increase over today's levels--and 2050 temperatures are expected to frequently match the top 5% hottest days from 1950-1979. In a three-year field study, researchers proved engineered soybeans yield more than conventional soybeans in 2050's predicted climatic conditions.“Our climate system and atmosphere are not changing in isolation from other factors--there are actually multiple facets,” said USDA/ARS scientist Carl Bernacchi, can associate professor of plant biology at the Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology at the University of Illinois. “The effect of carbon dioxide in and of itself seems to be very generalized, but neglects the complexity of adding temperature into the mix. This research is one step in the right direction towards trying to figure out a way of mitigating those temperature-related yield losses that will likely occur even with rising carbon dioxide concentrations.”Published in the Journal of Experimental Botany, this study found the modified crop yielded more when subjected to both increased temperature and carbon dioxide levels; however, they found little to no difference between the modified and unmodified crops grown in either increased temperature, increased carbon dioxide, or today's climate conditions.This work suggests that we can harness genetic changes to help offset the detrimental effects of rising temperature. In addition, Bernacchi said, it illustrates that we cannot deduce complicated environmental and plant systems to increasing carbon dioxide levels increase yields and increasing temperature reduce yields.“Experiments under controlled conditions are great to understand concepts and underlying mechanisms,” said first author of the study Iris Köhler, a former postdoctoral researcher in the Bernacchi lab. “But to understand what will happen in a real-world situation, it is crucial to study the responses in a natural setting--and SoyFACE is perfect for this kind of study.”SoyFACE (Soybean Free Air Concentration Enrichment) is an innovative facility that emulates future atmospheric conditions to understand the impact on Midwestern crops. These findings are especially remarkable because the crops in this SoyFACE experiment were exposed to the same environmental conditions (i.e. the sun, wind, rain, clouds, etc.) as other Illinois field crops.“It's actually a bit of a surprise,” Bernacchi said. “I've been doing field research for quite some time, and variability is one of the things that's an inherent part of field research. Of course, we did see variability in yields from year to year, but the difference between the modified and unmodified plants was remarkably consistent over these three years.”These modified soybeans are just one part of the equation to meet the demands of 2050. This modification can likely be combined with other modifications--a process called “stacking”--to further improve yields. “When we're trying to meet our food needs for the future, this specific modification is one of the many tools that we're going to need to rely upon,” Bernacchi said. “There is a lot of research across the planet that's looking at different strategies to make improvements, and many of these are not mutually exclusive.”
A House of Lords report into Brexit strips down the mix of opportunities and challenges facing the UK’s agricultural and food sectors which is says, are getting mixed messages from the government – and one of the most striking aspects of the report is the fact that up to 97% of food and drink exports from Britain could be at risk.The much anticipated House of Lords report has today (May 3) been published and lays bare the UK’s current huge over reliance on local EU markets, or at least the Single Market.However, once the UK leaves the EU, Theresa May has already signalled that it will also leave the Single Market, which means a whole myriad of new trade deals need to be negotiated – and it’s the detailed terms of these deals which are causing so much speculation and concern.The worry is that negotiations between the UK government and the EU are strained and failing to reach a robust exit deal that goes in the favor of British industries, will hit multiple sectors extremely hard.Industries could be looking at a future filled with complicated processes, high tariffs, and border controls. Meanwhile, the British government claims to be investigating a whole host of new opportunities in other international export markets, but there is such a lack of clarity on so many issues, speculation continuously mounts as to what Brexit will actually mean for those in the UK agri-food sectors and exporters currently over reliant on exporting within the European Union.Today’s Lords report on the implications of Brexit details this high dependency and includes   comments and evidence given by a range of industry professionals.On average around 80% of Britain’s agricultural exports go to the EU, while according to evidence given by the Food and Drinks Federation to the Lords report, “the overwhelming majority of trade (over 70 per cent of exports and vital imports) is with EU member states—and 94% of imports and 97% of exports are with countries with which the EU has negotiated an FTA”.How could it impact ingredients and the Irish border?The broader issue of supply chains present a unique challenge on the island of Ireland, according to the report.Noel Lavery, Permanent Secretary of the Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs (DAERA) in Northern Ireland, tells the Lords: “The level of North/South integration in production/processing chains is considerable. Many agri-food businesses are structured and operate on a cross-border basis. This made them especially vulnerable to the imposition of customs controls and tariffs.”Ian Wright, Director General of the FDF, gave an illustration: “If you take one example—a bottle of Baileys Irish Cream—one in five cows in Ireland produces the milk and, if you are a Northern Irish cow, your milk crosses the border five times before it goes into the bottle. The idea that that would be subject to tariffs hither and yon is really very scary.”Speaking toFoodIngredientsFirstrecently, the Kerry Group’s new Taste and Nutrition Division President and CEO of Europe,Malcolm Sheil, explained how the company has already done much work planning for Brexit.“When it comes to Brexit, we obviously have quite a large footprint in the UK. We have a global supply chain as well and are very used to sourcing different raw materials from around the world,” Sheil says. “We have done a huge amount of scenario work on our customers’ current business and how to help them through this period of uncertainty and post-Brexit. We are confident that we are very well positioned to be able to maneuver as required, depending on what the outcome of Brexit is. That is both for supplying back into the UK and for manufacturing in the UK and exporting back into mainland Europe,” he adds.Similar concerns surround other raw ingredients like flour and how Brexit will impact on the bakery sector.The National Association of British and Irish Flour Millers (Nabim) has raised similar concerns for the cereal industry, highlighting the “significant volumes” of trade with the EU: “This trade (whether imports or exports) would not be maintained if tariffs were imposed. Therefore the health of the cereals sector on both sides of the channel depends on the retention of tariff free trade between the UK and the EU 27 once we leave the Union.”The dairy industry also has major concerns over the increase in costs concerning imports into the UK, as does the UK meat industry.The British Meat Processors Association (BMPA) cautioned that beef exports would also be at a disadvantage: “In most cases, [the EU] tariff equates to an addition of 50 per cent or more to the value of imports, which seriously impacts on the ability of imported beef to compete with EU meat.” As for pigs: “The high level of tariffs effectively means that most non-EU pork is uncompetitive on the EU market.””The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is the agricultural policy of the European Union which was introduced in 1962 and has undergone several changes since then to reduce the cost (from 71% of the EU budget in 1984 to 39% in 2013) and to also consider rural development in its aims.According to the report, CAP has played a fundamental role in regulating and supporting UK agriculture since the UK joined the then European Economic Community and has helped in facilitating free trade in agrifood products within the EU Single Market.Many UK farmers rely on CAP funding to sustain their businesses, while wider rural communities also benefit from agri-environment schemes, rural investment and the sustained agricultural production in often remote areas.However, CAP has come in for a lot of criticism over the years, often focused on how bureaucratic it is. On top of that, some in the agricultural industry believe CAP financial support has been misdirected and ineffective, therefore Brexit presents a real opportunity for the UK to review and adopt a policy for food and farming which regulates and supports the agricultural sector effectively, and which is tailored to the UK’s unique farming landscape, says the report.Talking specifically about the trade of agri-food products, the report says that once the EU framework has been scrapped and Britain is outside the EU, the UK must develop its own external tariffs. It is entirely possible the UK will be subject to higher external tariffs, “to the detriment of UK farmers and food manufacturers—unless a preferential trade agreement is agreed.”“The UK may also face non-tariff barriers when exporting agriculture and food products to the EU, resulting in delays at ports and additional administrative costs. Both tariff and non-tariff barriers could disrupt integrated supply chains between the UK and the EU, and pose a particular challenge for the agri-food sector in Northern Ireland,” it adds.“As it negotiates new trading relations with the EU and the wider world the Government will need to balance complex interests. It will need to secure a fair deal for farmers and maintain high standards for agricultural products in the UK, including farm animal welfare, while delivering affordable food to consumers and complying with WTO rules.”The report says the Government is currently giving “mixed messages” to the agricultural sector.“Its vision for the UK as a leading free-trade nation with low tariff barriers to the outside world does not sit easily with its declared commitment to high quality and welfare standards in the UK farming sector. Combining and delivering these two objectives will be a considerable challenge,” it adds.“Agricultural policy therefore cannot be seen in isolation from trade. The terms of future free trade agreements will affect or limit domestic policies on regulation, funding and farming standards, while those policies may in turn determine which countries UK products can be sold to.”UK-EU trade will be subject to customs checks and controls to ascertain that products are of a satisfactory standard once the UK withdraws from the customs union.The report cites one example, given to the committee by Professor Alan Swinbank, to illustrate the potential challenges ahead in terms of border and customer checks.“One thinks of the port of Dover trying to cope with products coming in and coming out. If we have to start checking microbiological contamination of chicken carcasses coming from the Netherlands, for example, those tests can take several days and the product wastes in that period.”Equally, the Agricultural and Horticultural Development Board (ADHB) has also raised concerns over the possible delays and ports and other entry points for perishable goods like fresh fruit and vegetables as well as meat.The UK agri-food sector accounted for 7.2% of the national Gross Value Added (GVA) in 2014, or £108 billion (US$139 billion) in total, within which agriculture accounted for £9.9 billion (US$12.7 billion). In 2014 the agricultural workforce consisted of 429,000 people, and the utilized agricultural area (UAA) amounted to 71% of land in the UK. The food manufacturing industry is also an inherent part of the UK agri-food sector, accounting for £26.9 billion (US$34.7 billion)  of GVA in 2014 and employed 381,000 people.By Gaynor Selby
Exceeding financial analysts expectations, Mondelez International reports its Q1 results which show a solid start to the year bolstered by strong sales of its so-called “power brands” like Oreo, Cadbury Dairy Milk, Ritz and Chips Ahoy! as well as Milka and Lacta chocolate.Net sales from these rose 1.6% in the quarter, while the confectionery giant says its first quarter revenue came in at US$6.4 billion which was above previous estimates, but represents a 0.6% decrease on net revenue in the same period a year before.Q1 net earning were US$630 million, up 13.7% and resulting in 41 cents of earnings per share."We had a solid start to the year despite challenging market conditions," says Irene Rosenfeld, Chairman and CEO. "We delivered both top-line organic growth and strong margin expansion in the quarter, while also making critical investments for our future. We remain confident in and committed to our balanced strategy for both top- and bottom-line growth, continuing to focus on what we can control to deliver long-term value creation for our shareholders."Organic net revenue increased 0.6%, with growth in all regions except North America.Gross profit margin was 39.4%, an increase of 10 basis points driven primarily by lower Restructuring Program implementation costs. Adjusted Gross Profit margin was 40.3%, a decrease of 20 basis points, driven by unfavorable mix impacts and higher input costs, partially offset by strong net productivity and improved pricing.Operating income margin was 13.1%, up 190 basis points, reflecting the Adjusted Operating Income gains and the benefit from the settlement of a Cadbury tax matter. Adjusted Operating Income margin increased 90 basis points to 16.8% due primarily to continued reductions in overhead costs and supply chain productivity savings.The company says it continues to expect Organic Net Revenue to increase at least 1% in 2017 and Adjusted Operating Income margin in the mid-16 percent range. The company also expects double-digit Adjusted EPS growth on a constant-currency basis and estimates currency translation would reduce net revenue growth by approximately 1% and Adjusted EPS by approximately $0.02. In addition, the company expects Free Cash Flow of approximately US$2 billion.
A recent Purdue study has deciphered why food ingredient blends are more sensitive to changes in climate than single ingredients. Featuring on the cover of the May edition of theJournal of Food Science Understanding, the study shows how food ingredients interact differently when blended and can help those in the industry consider best practices to handle or package their product for a longer shelf life.“Blending crystalline ingredients such as salt and sugar with amorphous solids (without uniform shape), such as proteins, starch-based ingredients and gums, destabilizes the ingredients when heated or exposed to increasing humidity,” says Lisa Mauer, Professor of Food Science who led the research at Purdue University. “This can be frustrating to food formulators and consumers alike.”Speaking toFoodIngredientsFirst, Mauer says: “While formulation and handling practices are in place to optimize the quality and shelf-life of powder blends, particularly when the packaged products are stored at ambient temperatures, there is less documentation available on the effects environments (temperature and humidity) have on the potential phase changes of the ingredients when they are blended together.”She adds: “For particularly sensitive ingredient blends, two important parameters could be documented: 1) identifying how the water activities of the amorphous ingredients change as temperature increases, particularly if there are different starting moisture contents in these ingredients, and 2) identifying how the deliquescence points of the crystalline ingredients change as temperature increases."“If the moisture content of an amorphous ingredient can be reduced before it is added to a formulation such that its water activity will never exceed the crossover temperature with the deliquescence points of co-formulated crystalline ingredients in expected environments throughout food distribution, then the packaged product quality and shelf-life should be better,” Mauer explains.How should the industry respond to these concerns? “There are numerous examples ingredient blends that are less stable than their component individual ingredients. To minimize ingredient blend instability, careful selection of formulations and packaging as well as establishment of quality control parameters including amorphous ingredient moisture contents documented to avoid the crossover point with deliquescence are recommended,” Mauer notes.The study builds on Mauer’s previous research on the deliquescence behavior of crystalline ingredients which identified the humidities at which crystalline ingredients begin to dissolve (the underlying reason behind salt, sugar, and lemonade mixes clumping). To prevent deliquescence, the humidity must be kept lower than the deliquescence thresholds.But this becomes more difficult when amorphous ingredients are added. “Picture amorphous ingredients as little sponges,” Mauer says. “These sponges absorb water from the environment and their texture changes.”Consumers find examples of this when a bag of chips is left open. As the chips absorb humidity, their texture becomes rubbery and stale. Similarly, cotton candy quickly becomes sticky on a warm summer day. The food industry uses the term “water activity” to describe the mobility of water in these foods, which gets higher as more water is absorbed or as the temperature increases.The study is the first to identify the crossover point between the crystalline ingredient deliquescence point and the amorphous ingredient water activity. Above the crossover point, crystalline ingredients dissolved in a closed system.The study focused on blends of particulates that can be found in instant beverage mixes, seasoning blends, cake mixes, vitamin preblend mixes and powders used to flavor snack foods.When food products move through distribution or home from grocery stores in the consumer’s trunk on a hot day, variant climates can affect the food before it ever gets to the pantry.“While the moisture sorption-related problems can be solved by packaging ingredient blends in individual serving sizes, this approach increases costs and the environmental burden associated with packaging does not solve the enhanced temperature sensitivity of the ingredient blends,” Mauer says.The research identified the moisture sorption properties of the ingredients, how the deliquescence points of the crystalline ingredients and the water activities of the amorphous ingredients are affected by temperature, how the ingredient blends respond to environments over time, and documented the physical state and thermal properties of ingredients and blends using advanced analytical techniques such as powder X-ray diffraction and differential scanning calorimetry which provides vital information to food formulators and industries seeking solutions to deliver the best product to the consumer.by Robin Wyers
Following new beverage contract with Britvic and PepsiCo, as of July 2017 SUBWAY stores will have removed around 3.7 billion calories from Great British diets, after converting to Britvic and PepsiCo beverages. This new partnership provides all customers with a broader product range whilst significantly reducing their overall calorie and sugar intake.The dynamic design of the new drinks fountains and fridge displays encourages customers to choose more low/no sugar options. This has led to an increase in customers choosing to purchase no sugar Pepsi Max or Diet Pepsi over full sugar cola in stores. The stores have also switched from full sugar Lemon Lime carbonated soft drink to only offering 7Up Free, ‘no sugar’ as a dispensed option as well as switching from a full sugar orange choice to Britvic’s lower sugar Orange Tango.As well as nudging consumers towards healthier choices of carbonated favorites, the SUBWAY brand has added Britvic’s iconic no added sugar Robinsons squash to the dispense options, enabling customers to enjoy their favorite household drink on the go for the first time in the UK. Britvic’s no added sugar Fruit Shoot and low calorie Drench also provide no/low sugar options for kids and adults.By choosing Britvic and PepsiCo’s portfolio of beverages, the SUBWAY brand has achieved an overall 30% reduction in calorie consumption in total, which can be extrapolated out, on average, of a removal of almost Two Million (1,702,327) calories per store annually.In addition, the brand has launched a new low/no sugar beverage trial across 12 hospital sites. This inaugural trial will help SUBWAY stores and beverage partners Britvic and PepsiCo determine the shift in customer behavior and sales impact that removing high sugar beverages and switching to no sugar and Reduced Sugar options only, will have in these environments.Peter Dowding, Country Director for the for the SUBWAY brand UK and Ireland said: “The Partnership with PepsiCo and Britvic has enabled us to offer our customers healthier drink options without compromising on quality or taste, reinforcing the strong healthier-for-you food-on-the-go credentials the brand already has in place. It further demonstrates our commitment to providing a better food environment and choice to our customers whilst aiding franchisees to build better businesses.”Sacha Clark, Marketing Director for the SUBWAY brand UK and Ireland commented “We’re proud that we have successfully removed almost four Billion calories from GB diets. It proves that our customers are open to lower sugar and healthier diet options so we will continue with initiatives and partnerships that aim to reduce calorie and sugar consumption in GB.”Paul Graham, GB Managing Director of Britvic comments: “The removal of 3.7 Billion calories from SUBWAY stores clearly shows the major impact we can deliver for our customers and consumers, both with our own brands and as the bottler for PepsiCo in the UK. We’re proud to see our industry-leading low and no sugar portfolio in action to drive change and nudge consumers towards healthier choices. Having started out in the 1930s as the British Vitamin Company, bringing an affordable source of vitamins to British people, health is in our DNA and this deal demonstrates our continued commitment to making life’s every day moments healthier and more enjoyable.”Mark Elwell, General Manager of PepsiCo Beverages UK added: “With a shared ambition and singular focus on encouraging healthier consumption habits, we have partnered with the SUBWAY brand to harness the expertise and innovation of our no sugar brands Pepsi MAX and 7Up Free to encourage people to switch from full sugar to low/no sugar beverage alternatives.“We strongly believe there are still further significant opportunities for PepsiCo and Britvic to do in nudging SUBWAY stores’ consumers to make healthier choices both through product and dispense innovations and bespoke and powerful Pepsi MAX marketing campaigns.”
First Choice Ingredients (FCI), one of the largest dairy ingredient companies in the United States, recently shipped its first orders from their new, full-scale production facility, confirming the market’s growing demand for high quality dairy concentrates.Purchased in late 2016, FCI spent the last several months testing, calibrating and updating the facility to ensure it was ready for full-scale production. The new plant has doubled FCI’s footprint and has the capacity to produce over 10 million pounds of dairy ingredients annually.“Getting the third facility up to our standards was an enormous undertaking,” said Jim Pekar, president of FCI. “But we know that our ability to speed up production timelines with this extra capacity will be a huge win for our customers.”Click to EnlargePekar toldFoodIngredientsFirst: “While our business as a whole is growing exponentially, the biggest opportunities for First Choice Ingredients today reside in the clean label and organic markets. Customers want labels with ingredients they can relate to, like milk, cream and cheese. Our natural products fit the bill perfectly, especially in the organic arena, where we can provide project-verified materials all the way back to the farms producing the milk. Our customers love that we are able to offer verification and consistency.”“Our third full-scale production facility provides us with a lot of options for growth. Initially, we will produce our most popular concentrates here including our cheddar cheese varieties, cream profiles and natural butters. We will also produce many of our Kosher and Halal versions here. As had been our strategy since we opened in 1994, the market will dictate how rapidly we expand our offerings at this facility.”With all licenses and certifications now completed, FCI recently celebrated their expansion with an official ribbon-cutting ceremony at the new Menomonee Falls facility with a variety of city and county officials.The 83,000 sq. ft. manufacturing space is Kosher and Halal certified.by Elizabeth Green
More than 100 associates from Mars will share the new innovative and sustainable office space in northwest Arkansas especially created for collaboration.Associates from Mars Food, Mars Chocolate, Wrigley and Mars Petcare are celebrating being in the LEED Gold Certified building with its open workspaces, office suites, Mars drinks-inspire work café and it’s very own dog park.LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) is the most widely used green building rating system in the world and provides a framework that project teams can apply to create healthy, highly efficient, and cost-saving green buildings. LEED certification is a globally recognized symbol of sustainability achievement.According to the company, the office opening is a celebration for Mars’ customers as well as its associates, by focusing on bringing the customer and consumer closer to the Mars organization and decision-making process, by being able to share insights and evolve to meet changing needs.Fitted for fun and collaboration, the facilities reflect Mars’ responsibility to the environment, its associates and the community.“Nothing is more important to us than our talent and our customers, which is why we’re so excited to be opening up this new office in Northwest Arkansas,” said Tim LeBel, president of sales at Mars Chocolate North America. “As a top employer, this location exemplifies our ability to provide an enhanced experience, not only for our associates but our customers and we’re excited at the prospect of even greater customer collaborations and partnerships.“Mars continues to grow their Arkansas presence, on both the manufacturing and retail support side,” adds Mike Preston, executive director of the Arkansas Economic Development Commission. “We are fortunate to have a company like Mars investing in Arkansas from Rogers to Fort Smith to Russellville. We look forward to Mars’ continued success in the state.”
Footprint, Innovation, Sourcing and Care – these four pillars form the foundation for the sustainability agenda of Symrise, a leading manufacturer of fragrances and flavorings. To minimize its environmental footprint, Symrise is constantly working to improve its processes and products. Within the Sourcing pillar, the company optimizes many parts of its value chain – for instance to source its important raw materials sustainably.CO2 Emissions Cut Considerably – Further Reductions PlannedAn important area of focus is the reduction of direct and indirect greenhouse gas emissions. In 2016, Symrise reduced these by 5.4 %. It is aiming to reduce them a further four percent per year by 2020. “The progress we have made with our Sustainability Record shows very positive development,” says Dr. Heinz-Jürgen Bertram, Chief Executive Officer of Symrise AG. “One crucial element was the opening of our heat and power cogeneration plant this past summer. It is making a significant contribution to reducing our production-related emissions. As we want to continue cutting our CO2 emissions, we are also currently working on a new climate strategy.”The commitment of the Holzminden-based company to climate protection was once again recognized in 2016, receiving the top score from the investor initiative CDP. In the categories Forest and Water, Symrise was listed among the best and received very good ratings. In both areas, the company was awarded a score of A(-), making it the leader in the industry. Symrise also earned a rating of A for its climate data and is thus the only company in the flavor and fragrance industry to be in a leading position in all three CDP categories.Sustainable Raw Material Sourcing as Key to a Viable Product PortfolioAnother strategic objective of the company is to have 100% of its key suppliers evaluated according to sustainability criteria by 2020 and thereby source its strategic key raw materials from sustainable sources. In cases where Symrise sources its raw materials directly on site, the company is actively involved in protecting the local population and environment. Examples of this include its work surrounding vanilla sourced from Madagascar and cosmetic ingredients from the Amazon region. With targeted development projects, Symrise integrates the local population directly into the value chain. In doing so, the company provides important impetus for a socially and environmentally appropriate method of cultivating natural resources. This, in turn, acts as the basis for providing sustainable products to customers and consumers.With the acquisition of Renessenz in the past year, the topic of sustainable forestry has also gained importance for Symrise. Many Renessenz suppliers are already certified according to the criteria of the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) or the Sustainable Forest Initiative (SFI). By participating in the CPD Forest program, the company is making its approaches and progress transparent in this area as well.
Enhancing the nutritional value of school meals in Honduras is the focus of Kerry Group’s most recent project.The Irish company has released details of its partnership with the World Food Programme (WFP), Project Leche, part of its ‘Towards 2020’ sustainability programme.  © Kerry Group"Our Kerry nutritionists and our agriculturalists will work alongside the project team in Honduras to improve efficiencies in terms of dairy production, to enhance the quality and value of dairy products, and in turn, and most importantly, to improve the nutritional value of the Home Grown School Meals Programme," said Frank Hayes, director of corporate affairs at Kerry Group.Kerry Group is also donating $750,000 (€688,000) in financial support for the project."Kerry group are providing financial support of $750,000 which will be used to fund the pilot project and based on the findings and on the project output it is hoped that the project can be expanded and that the findings will be used to inform the entire Home Grown School Meals Programme in Honduras," said Hayes.The three-year programme will focus on nutritional enhancement of school meals for children in Honduras, by using sustainably-produced dairy products.Kerry Group says it will be using its dairy heritage and expertise to work directly alongside the WFP, as well as local Honduran communities and national stakeholders, in order to support farmers in the production of safe and sustainable dairy products."It will benefit the farming and milk supplying community in terms of bringing greater efficiency and greater focus into the available technologies to improve their livelihoods. It is quite a broad-based programme and will boost the income of the smallholding farmers and hopefully provide broader market opportunities for their production," Hayes said.The Irish food specialists say these dairy products can then be used to bring greater nutritional diversity into school meals.Prolonged drought, hurricanes and other natural disasters have disrupted Honduras’ food security.  © WFPAlthough the WFP has been supporting Honduran communities since the 1970s, this will be its first partnership with Kerry Group or any other Irish company.Currently the WFP, working alongside the Honduran government, provides meals to 95% of the country’s total school population.The Home Grown School Meals programme, managed by the WFP, helps to strengthen local economies by buying from small producers.Project Leche aims to improve the Home Grown School Meals programme by educating children and parents on nutrition and by adding more dairy into school meals."The programme is very much a collaborative programme. It works with various government agencies in the region, in terms of education and nutritional and dietary information. It is very much hoped to raise the level of nutritional awareness amongst the teachers, parents and the children," said Hayes.Greg Barrow, head of WFP’s United Kingdom and Republic of Ireland office, said: “The World Food Programme is hugely excited to be partnering with Kerry and bringing their expertise on board as we try to add dairy products to the school diet in Honduras”.“This pilot project in Honduras has great potential and we hope it will set the standard for the integration of dairy products into school meals for the benefit of child nutrition and poor milk producers in other developing countries around the world”. 
Healthier, high-fibre pasta is the newest 'reinvented carbohydrate' with potential for EFSA-backed health claims, says Ulrick & Short.The British clean label specialist has announced its range of scilia fibres which help to enhance the nutritional profile of carbohydrates, making them healthier for consumers."Scilia are a range of fibres that are added as a dry ingredient during the manufacturing process of pasta. It can be used in fillings too," said Adrian Short, director at Ulrick & Short.As a result of these fibres, the brand claims an added 4.5% of fibre can be added to pasta, with no change to its taste, texture or mouthfeel.Ulrick & Short say it is still experimenting in order to achieve an addition of 6% more fibre.The scilia range includes both soluble and insoluble fibres which can bind to different degrees of water, meaning they can be used in numerous different food processing applications.“Enhancing the nutritional profile of foodstuffs such as pasta is challenging enough – but we also need to ensure that our solutions are equally as deliverable on the factory floor as they are in our technologically-focused development kitchens,” said Danni Schroeter, R&D manager at Ulrick & Short.“We have achieved this with significant nutritional claim potential on pasta lines, but this claim offers even more massive potential in conjunction with our other revolutionary ingredients”.Manufacturers can use the fibres to enhance the nutritional content of pasta based ready meals or for meals in quick service restaurants.The fibres can also be used in meat products and vegetarian products, "anything formed or reformed", said Short."Depending on the level [of fibres used] the manufacturer may be able make a claim. They are also very good at binding water or oil and can be used to improve/modify texture and give more stability to the food they are in," Short said. 
Governments and supermarkets must do more to prevent food waste, a report has urged as it reveals the cost to each consumer totals £200 (€237) per year.According to the Environment Food and Rural Affairs Committee, initiatives such as establishing a national food waste reduction target and the relaxation of rules preventing the sale of 'wonky vegetables’ could be implemented to cut costs.Supermarkets were also asked to provide data on the amount of food they disposed of.“We commend Tesco for publishing its food waste data from across the supply chain. Sainsbury's is moving in the same direction, but needs more transparency. The fact that no other retailers have followed their lead shows that a voluntary approach is inadequate,” said Committee chair Neil Parish MP.“The Government needs to step in and force other major supermarkets to be transparent about food waste. We welcome the will shown by retailers to redistribute surplus food. However, we believe that more must be done. There is a huge amount of surplus food that is currently not being redistributed."  "Supermarkets have to make improvements to their packaging, such as increasing the use of split and re-sealable packets, to help consumers reduce food waste" ©iStockThe report comes as figures in 2015 reveal that £13 billion (€15.4 billion) of food was wasted in the UK, costing the average household £470 (€556) a year—or those with children £700 (€828).In the long-tem the MPs wanted to see an awareness of food waste start at an early age.  They called for the Government to examine how lessons on food and food waste could be incorporated into the curriculum.Additionally, the Committee called for the incoming Government to continue the current review with The Waste and Resources Action Programme (WRAP) and the Food Standards Agency on food date labelling. They called for guidance for the food industry to be available by the end of the year.“The review should specifically look at whether there is a need for 'best before' dates at all,” the Committee said.“Supermarkets have to make improvements to their packaging, such as increasing the use of split and re-sealable packets, to help consumers reduce food waste.”Food waste is a global issue. According to The Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) close to one-third of food produced for human consumption is lost or wasted globally, which amounts to approximately 1.3 billion tonnes per year.In the UK, it is estimated that 10 million tonnes of food and drink waste arises post-farmgate each year, 60% of which could be avoided.The Courtauld CommitmentThe Courtauld Commitment is a voluntary agreement introduced in 2005 to aid businesses in optimising their overall performance and decrease their environmental impact.Phase 3 began in 2013 and runs to 2015 with targets evaluated against a 2012 baseline.The final results for the three-year agreement were published in 2016.The committee report also expressed disappointment that a large number of manufactures had not signed up to The Courtauld Commitment.Close to 150 food and drink companies had signed up to the commitment introduced by WRAP in March 2016.These companies include Unilever and Nestlé, retailers Asda, Tesco and Sainsbury and one of the founder signatories Arla Foods UK.While it is a voluntary commitment, the Committee urged WRAP and the Government to re-double their efforts to increase participation in the Courtauld process by food manufacturers.Dealing with food waste was not neglected in the Committee’s discussions. The group recommended that the Government work closely with WRAP and Local Authorities to ensure that separate food waste collections were offered to as many households as possible within the UK.Local authorities too had to look at the opportunities to introduce separate food waste collection when new waste contracts were put in place."The best thing we can do is to prevent raw materials, ingredients and products from becoming waste in the first place. If surplus cannot be prevented, then redistribution to people in need or as animal feed is the next best option,” Parish concluded.“Once it is thrown away the best way of dealing with food waste is to recycle it by sending it to anaerobic digestion or composting. The worst way to deal with it is to send it for disposal through waste incineration without energy recovery or to send it to landfill." 
UK food and drink manufacturers have called on the government not to implement any future nutrient taxes on foods.The demand is part of a five-point manifesto, published by the Food and Drink Federation (FDF), which also calls on politicians to agree a transition phase to help the sector negotiate Brexit and any resultant changes to trade tariffs, access to labour and regulations.The manifesto was published as the UK parliament was dissolved in preparation for the national election on June 8th. The new government will be tasked with steering the country through Brexit – and it won’t be easy. This week, relationships between Brussels and London appeared to deteriorate, with reports suggesting that no future trade deal will be discussed until the British government comes to an agreement on the estimated €60bn ‘divorce bill’ and citizens rights.Brexit remains a major concern for Europe’s food and drink companies, according to a survey published by FoodNavigator last month .FDF said UK companies had much to lose and plenty to gain from leaving the EU. The risk of a “cliff edge” scenario – in which a deal with Brussels doesn’t materialise – must be avoided.However, the next government could “turbo charge” exports, which will also help prepare the industry for a “more competitive future” outside the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP). “We are looking for the next Government to work with us so our firms are ready to take advantage of growing demand, including new opportunities in non-EU countries,” the FDF manifesto reads.The federation has also called for new policies to increase levels of home-grown talent and a “stable regulatory regime” that ensures the UK is “highly competitive and does not discourage business investment with regard to EU competitors and the rest of the world”.The UK’s levy on sugar-sweetened drinks  – due to come into force next year – is certainly controversial, but if it proves successful then politicians could well look at extending the concept to certain foods. FDF, a vocal critic of the drinks tax, said this would be a bad idea.The new government must “provide financial certainty to industry by confirming there will be no further nutrient taxes on foods”, it said. This would offer companies “the security to commit financing to long-term, costly calorie reduction programmes”.Indeed, a new “holistic calorie reduction programme” is needed. This would focus on portion sizing, marketing healthier options and driving behaviour change. More public funding will be required to investigate how healthier foods can be made the foods of choice. “Reformulation takes time, involves technical challenges and incurs great costs,” FDF explained.FDF also used its manifesto to highlight the importance of the sector to the UK’s economy, and the need for a Brexit deal that’s good for business. The food and drink industry is the UK’s largest manufacturing sector, contributing €33.4bn (£28.2bn) to the economy annually and employing more than 400,000 people.“Food is a matter of national security,” explained director general Ian Wright. “Food and farming is the sector most impacted by exiting the EU. It is imperative that the new government recognises this, and the importance of the food and drink industry in relation to the success of the wider UK economy.” 
With more than a third of the year gone, we take our fourth look at food safety and quality research.The National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark , has developed a method that they claim halves the time it takes slaughterhouses to test for Salmonella in pork meat.Current testing methods take at least 10 hours to get results but the new method can be completed in less than five hours.“This enables testing to be carried out within one working shift and the meat can be sent to market faster, which in turn reduces the slaughterhouses’ operating costs for meat chillers and extends the shelf life of the meat in the distribution chain,” said the researchers.The workflow – which is being patented – is similar to current methods at the slaughterhouses.It consists of a three hour enrichment in standard buffered peptone water and a real-time PCR compatible sample preparation method, based on filtration, centrifugation and enzymatic digestion, followed by fast cycling real-time PCR detection.Massachusetts Institute of Technology  (MIT) researchers have created a test based on a type of liquid droplet that can bind to bacterial proteins and be detected by the naked eye or a smartphone.They said it could offer a faster and cheaper alternative to existing food safety tests.To turn droplets into sensors, the researchers designed a surfactant molecule containing mannose sugar to self-assemble at the hydrocarbon–water interface, which makes up the top half of the droplet surface.These molecules can bind to a protein called lectin, found on the surface of some strains of E. coli. When E. coli is present, the droplets attach to the proteins and become clumped together.So light hitting them scatters in many directions and droplets become opaque when seen from above.The team hope to adapt the technology into arrays of small wells, each containing droplets customized to detect a different pathogen and linked to a different QR code.They hope to launch a company to commercialize the technology within the next 18 months.Work on aflatoxin and ListeriaIn other work, Monica Schmidt, a plant geneticist at the University of Arizona , has engineered a strain of corn that shuts off the ability of a plant fungus to produce aflatoxin.Schmidt said it has the potential to improve public health and save lives in Africa and prevent tens of millions of tons of grain being destroyed each year.The procedure embeds a snippet of RNA from an aspergillus fungus into the corn plant. When the host plant and fungus exchange small bits of genetic information during infection, the ability to produce aflatoxin is shut down.The research was conducted with a $100,000 grant from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation but was not awarded second phase funding.A Purdue University  study shows that Listeria monocytogenes could live within lettuce in every stage of the growth process inside the plant tissue.L. monocytogenes can gain entry through cracked seed coats, small tears in root tissue during germination and damaged plant tissue. The researchers found exposing lettuce to the bacteria could lead to infection of plant tissue in 30 minutes.Research led by Amanda Deering, clinical assistant professor in the Department of Food Science showed L. monocytogenes in romaine lettuce can persist up to 60 days or until harvest.The study was in defined lab conditions that may not directly represent field conditions.Not that type of modellingA team from Cleveland State University has been awarded a three-year, $258,000 grant from the US Department of Agriculture for work to create better controls to reduce contamination.They will develop a mathematical model designed to better assess how pathogens spread through the food supply.“Ironically, the produce washing process has been identified as a key point of pathogen transfer in the food supply chain as contaminated produce mixes with uncontaminated food and pathogens ‘escape’ without being completely removed from all items," said Partha Srinivasan, associate professor of mathematics at CSU and principal project investigator.The team will create a fully operational produce washing system in a laboratory environment to enable better prediction of pathogen cross-contamination and chemical analysis of sanitizer performance.University of Maryland  researchers have developed a model to understand the pathway of E. coli in leafy green production which simulates the effects of soil, irrigation, cattle, wild pig and rainfall in a hypothetical farm.Results conclude the peak July to November timeframe is consistent with the prevalence of E. coli in cattle and wild pig feces in Salinas Valley, a leafy greens producing region in California.Concentration of E. coli in leafy greens can be significantly reduced if feces contamination is controlled, said the research team.The human factorMeanwhile, Dr Derek Watson, a senior lecturer in the University of Sunderland’s Faculty of Business, Law and Tourism, has been investigating how manufacturers can develop a positive food safety culture by adopting a new industry model.The model was devised for totrain, a North East based training business specialising in food safety, as part of a national research exercise.Dr Watson designed the questionnaire which finds out issues affect businesses with regards to food safety compliance and offer validated feedback.“What our model does is to look at clear information and data that demonstrates an organisation has buy-in from its own workforce and how effective are those systems running in the organisation in order to achieve continuous improvement.”It is designed on the four C’s Model: Control, Co-operation, Communications and Competence.Data is analysed, followed by one-to-one interviews and focus groups, before being validated and results presented at each stage before a final report.John Husband, totrain CEO, said with new and emerging threats and the supply of manufactured ingredients becoming global food safety culture is more important than ever.“We are used to the more tangible elements of food safety, process control, hazard analysis, food safety standards but a manufactures approach to food safety, the behavioural aspects and creating a culture of responsibility is now an important aspect of any food manufactures responsibilities.” Three businesses are involved with one named as Fulwell Mill, a manufacturer of organic, Fairtrade and healthy foods. The findings will be documented into an academic paper to inform food manufacturers of the core issues they face and suggested solutions.Finally, family and friends are the first source for food safety information, according to University of Florida Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences research.From the national online survey of 1,024 people, 64% said they got food safety information from family and friends. Health professionals were deemed the most trustworthy (45% of respondents).“While most people trust professionals as an information source about food safety, they are more likely to reach out to families and friends for advice,” said Alexa Lamm, a UF/IFAS assistant professor of agricultural education and communication.“The finding holds implications for the power of social media, as people can readily access one another and may be getting information from unreliable sources, rather than leaning on universities or health organizations.” 
Braskem will present applications for its ‘I’m green’ green plastic packaging, including coffee packaging for The Netherlands’ Peeze at Interpack this week (May 4-10).Peeze is the only coffee processor in The Netherlands to supply coffee which is 100% certified, and since launching the product says it has reduced its carbon footprint: for each kilo of Green Polyethylene used to package its coffee, more than 4.5 kg of CO2 is captured from the atmosphere, it claims.“Our Green Plastic is the result of a research and development study involving a variety of people and investment of around $300m,” said Gustavo Sergi, head, Renewal Chemicals Business, Braskem.“This biopolymer is currently exported to Europe, the US, Asia, Africa and South America and is used in more than 150 brands worldwide.”Other products on display will be Braskem Amppleo, a polypropylene resin developed for the production of high performance foams, and advances in intelligent packaging technology.Braskem currently makes Polypropylene Cups produced in partnership with packaging company Gizeh and Green Plastic produced in partnership with Finnish company Stora Enso.Amppleo is a high-melt-strength polypropylene resin (HMS-PP) developed for versatile and high-performance foam applications in the packaging, automotive and industrial markets.  The resin can withstand temperatures of up to 130°C without deforming and enables the production of foams for applications within a broad density range, from 30 to 300 kilograms per cubic meter.It enables products to be made with a lighter weight than those made using other materials and is 100% recyclable.Braskem’s research into intelligent packaging in partnership with Clemson University in the US and Rio Grande do Sul Federal University (UFRGS) in Brazil, includes packaging which can alert the consumer, via color changes, of the quality and shelf life of food products.The company recently partnered with Made In Space - a US company which develops 3D printers for NASA to supply Green Plastic for the manufacture of tools and parts for the International Space Station (ISS).The Additive Manufacturing Facility (AMF) printer, developed by Made In Space to work in microgravity environments, will provide astronauts with the ability to produce Green Polyethylene tools and spare parts on demand, on space missions.Braskem's Ultra High Molecular Weight Polyethylene (UHMWPE) – tradename UTEC, an engineered polymer with excellent mechanical properties, such as high abrasion resistance, impact strength and low coefficient of friction, was used in the creation of the printer.The UTEC plant in Texas started operations in January after a successful plant commission and subsequently began producing commercial grade product and samples. It serves clients in North America, Europe and Asian. 
ULMA Packaging says it wants to break into new markets with its thermoforming and flowrapping technology as its TSA 680 automatic tray sealer takes centre stage at Interpack.The company is promoting its traysealers, flow wrappers, thermoformers, vertical (VFFS) bagmakers and Galaxy stretch film wrapper at the show in Düsseldorf, Germany, (May 4-10).The TSA 680 can seal MAP, Vacuum and Skin depending on the requirements of the product to be packaged.Chris Pickles, managing director, ULMA, said its thermoforming and flowrapping technology can be tailor-made to suit a customer’s requirements, as the company looks to consolidate its presence in established markets and break into new ones.“Our expanding product portfolio will continue the growth the company has enjoyed over the past years. Exhibiting in front of a global audience at Interpack puts us in an excellent position to showcase the expertise we have in automation and our high-quality packaging machinery,” he added.ULMA Packaging introduced a high tech version of its popular Atlanta range of horizontal flow wrapping machines to the UK market last year.The Atlanta Hi-tech is designed to produce a three seal pillow pack for sectors including bakery, dairy, fresh produce, confectionery, biscuits and pies.The technology has a ‘no product, no bag’ feature for misplaced product detection and access to UDAQ software for integration with remote line monitoring and data capture.Other features include: rotary crimp jaws with an electronic clutch, three pairs of pneumatically opening and closing fin seal rollers, a 700 mm wide motorised reel holder with pneumatic core clamp and an infeed conveyor with 2 meters of feeding space.It is suitable for a cross-section of heat sealing films including BOPP, PVC, polyester, cellulose, cold sealing films, shrinkable, HDPE and laminate up to 300mm in roll diameter.   
Errington Cheese has won the right to see evidence linking one of its products to an E. coli outbreak last summer.The firm was granted a petition in the Court of Session to be given data used by Food Standards Scotland (FSS) and Health Protection Scotland (HPS) to link Dunsyre Blue with the outbreak which sickened 26 and hospitalised 17 people.“We firmly believe that Dunsyre Blue did not cause the outbreak last year,” said Errington Cheese.“We have asked food safety, epidemiological, and microbiological experts to study the report and they are all highly critical of the manner of the investigation, the bias, the lack of logic and the many errors.”A case against Lanark Blue and Corra Linn will be heard from 1 June in Lanark Sheriff Court, in which Errington Cheese will attempt to show the cheese is safe. The firm said last year’s production of Corra Linn is at the farm in an area held by South Lanarkshire Council (SLC) and the Lanark Blue is in a container in Paisley under control of SLC. It laid off all staff after being banned from selling products last year but has now been permitted to sell Lanark Blue.“We are working flat out to farm and produce and sell cheese and we are having to cope with almost daily visits from the council’s EHO’s. Obviously this degree of harassment cannot continue if our business is to survive.” 
Fonterra has launched its first Anchor milk pop-up store at Super Brand Mall in Shanghai.The mall attracts more than 20m shoppers per year and has 250,000 square metres of retail space.The full Anchor China range of UHT milks, milk powders, cheese and butter is on display at the store, where shoppers can also craft their own recipes, view videos of New Zealand farms and play interactive games.Christina Zhu, president Fonterra Greater China, said Chinese consumers are currently much more brand conscious and brand loyal than previous generations, so finding ways to create connections to the brand is a key part of Fonterra’s brand-building strategy for Anchor in the country.Vice president China brands Chester Cao said brands in China need to integrate their online and offline presence to reach consumers in the digital age.“Our pop-up store is recognition of that need to integrate,” Cao said. 
Urbanization, sustainability, changing demographics, brand protection, responsibility and globalization are six megatrends affecting the development of packaging technology today says Constantia Flexibles.Speaking at Interpack 2017, Alexander Baumgartner, CEO Constantia Flexibles, said by 2050, it is estimated around 70% of the world’s population will live in cities. City dwellers are more likely to buy convenience products from supermarkets and don’t have a lot of space to store their purchases.As a result, packaging that does not take up much space and can be easily transported is becoming more important.“For example, there is increasing demand for on-the-go formats such as spout pouches for drinking yogurts, which are convenient for single usage and provide excellent protection against moisture, oxygen and light,” he added.“In today’s globalized world, it’s possible for companies to sell their products just about anywhere. This has led to ever-greater competition between multinational brands.“Packaging plays a key role in the consumer’s decision to purchase one brand over another. This means packaging must not only have a high quality and be convenient, but communicate the brand message and differentiate the product from the competition.”Baumgartner said Coca-Cola’s ‘Christmas Bow’ label is a good example of a successful packaging product. Consumers could transform the special edition label into a festive bow, giving the Coca-Cola brand a unique selling point.“Demographic change will continue to be a megatrend over the coming decades. Aging populations are becoming more prevalent, particularly in industrialized Western countries, with an increasing number of people over the age of 50,” he added.Constantia Flexibles has created products to meet the needs of older generations such as Spear Seal, a recloseable self-sticking labeling system for cheese slices, for example.At the same time, Baumgartner said birth rates are decreasing, fewer people are starting families, and the number of single-person households is on the rise.“These trends have led to demand for smaller food portions and packaging that ensures a long shelf life. Constantia Flexibles manufactures several products that meet these requirements, such as the Alufoil container systems, for maximum shelf life and ideal for ready-made meals and desserts,” he added.The fourth megatrend influencing product development is sustainability.Constantia Flexibles claims it has committed itself to reducing its CO2 emissions (per square meter output) by 40% by 2023.Various measures will be used to achieve this goal, including the reduction of packaging materials, the development of new specifications and the use of recyclable materials.The SpearRC Recycling Compatible labels for PET bottles and mono-polymer laminates for various applications are just two examples of its sustainable packaging technology. 
Cosmo Films is exhibiting its BOPP Black Velvet Lamination film and speciality films for PSA (Pressure Sensitive Adhesive) labeling applications at Interpack.The recently launched black velvet lamination films offer an intense black color with a velvet touch to laminated paper/paperboard or packaging to enhance its aesthetics. It is also available for post-lamination processes like spot UV, foil stamping or printing.Shailesh Verma, global sales/marketing, Cosmo Films, said solid colors like blue, red, and black are tricky to handle, especially when used in the background for offset printing. These background colors also take longer to dry, leading to increased lead-time for print delivery. Therefore, offset printers usually avoid using these as background colors.“Graphic art designers prefer using black a background because of the impact it generates with foiling and other post lamination operations and more so in the case of  luxury packaging,” he said.“Understanding the gap in this need, Cosmo Films has come up with black velvet lamination films, which could compensate for the black printing on paper for background. These black BOPP-based velvet touch lamination films need to be laminated to the unprinted paper before going for printing or post-lamination embellishments.”Besides luxury packaging applications, black velvet films are suitable for high-end promotional material.“The launch of black velvet lamination films has added a new dimension to our range of premium lamination films and this development can be replicated in other colors as well. The films have been commercialized and the response so far has been extremely encouraging,” added Verma.Some of the barrier films on display at Interpack include; High Moisture Barrier Films (HMB) -metalized barrier films that can be used for sandwich lamination in snack foods, dry milk powder and powdered drinks sachets/packs, where loss of moisture is a concern.Aroma Barrier Films (AB for coffee/tea, spices and chewing gum and Aroma and Oxygen Barrier Films (AOB): for packaging cream biscuits, chocolates, chips and snacks with some dose of fatty content.  Established in 1981, Cosmo Films is one of the manufacturers of Bi-axially Oriented Polypropylene (BOPP) films used for packaging, labels and lamination applications and is one of largest exporter of BOPP films from India with distribution centres in India, Japan, Korea and the US. 
Across the consumer goods industry, the future depends on manufacturers taking control of both quality and product safety issues, says Eagle product inspection.The company will be showcasing its RMI 400 inspection system for the poultry industry; FA3/M inline fat measurement and contaminant detection for meat; PACK 240x-ray for inline contaminant detection in packaged goods; Tall XSDV with conveyor for contaminants in rigid containers such as cans, bottles and jars at Interpack in Dusseldorf, Germany this week (May 4-10).Christy Draus, marketing manager, Eagle Product Inspection, told ConfectioneryNews, today’s consumers are not prepared to let quality and safety issues go unreported and any failure could be circulated via social media outlets in a matter of minutes.The cost of a product recall can have devastating effects, both in the short and long terms, and this continues to be a key area of focus for brands and retailers alike.“Some larger retailers are now insisting on x-ray systems as part of a supplier’s product inspection program, as they are aware of the high level of contaminant detection capability for materials such as metal, mineral stone, calcified bone, glass and some high density rubber and plastic compounds,” she said.“Investment in research and development will continue to be a vital part of our business and our systems and accompanying software will become ever more advanced as challenges are identified and overcome.”The Eagle Product Inspection, based in Tampa, Florida, evaluates finished products for contaminants such as metal, glass, stone and bone and analyze the fat content of meat, count components, check seal integrity, and measure mass and assess fill levels.  RMI 400 inspection system“Interpack allows us to interact directly with our customers, and potential customers, and to demonstrate the benefits of x-ray technology in real time,” added Draus.“For those that have not used x-ray in the past, it can be seen to be a complicated area to get to grips with. By talking directly to one of our experts on the stand, this myth can be put to rest via live demonstrations and accurate data, leaving visitors with a clear vision of the benefits of x-ray over competitor technologies.” 
Developments surrounding Industry 4.0 and the Internet of Things (IoT) have started to facilitate a major paradigm shift in various manufacturing industries, according to Mettler-Toledo.The company is showcasing four operational lines at Interpack in Dusseldorf, Germany, this week (May 4-10) relating to general food, dry food, wet food and pharmaceuticals. Highlights including new innovations in metal detection, checkweighing, vision inspection and inspection management software.Neil Giles, marketing communications manager, Mettler-Toledo Product Inspection Division, said product inspection is only one piece of the Industry 4.0 jigsaw puzzle but the company wants to help manufacturers with a smooth integration.“Across the range of product inspection equipment, from metal detection and x-ray technologies to checkweighers and vision systems, Mettler-Toledo is constantly working with its customers to offer more and more advanced functionality,” he said.“A good example of connectivity between systems can be found in both checkweighers and x-ray machines. Both can be connected to filling systems to monitor over- and under-fills. This ‘Feedback Control’ function means customers can remain compliant in terms of weights and measures legislation and prevents costly product giveaway.”Other highlights at the show include improved data management software, ProdX 2.0, to connect product inspection equipment across the entire production line into a single network.An Emulation feature based on VNC technology, to remotely access and control multiple metal detectors via networked mobile phones, tablets, laptops, and other production line equipment and a Profile Advantage Pipeline system to tackle the issue of bubbles and product voids to virtually eliminate false rejects in pipeline applications.    “Tradeshows are the perfect environment in which to gauge the current trends and challenges in the sectors a company serves,” said Giles.“Advances in technology will also be of interest, of course, as well as keeping abreast of the latest packaging innovations.“There are a large number of standards and regulations to monitor in the food sector - those under the Global Food Safety Initiative (GFSI) umbrella for instance.“These include FSSC 22000, SQF, IFS and BRC. More recently introduced legislation in the form of the FDA Food Safety Modernization Act is also high on the agenda for manufacturers. Of course, the frameworks to support compliance with the standards and law are also important.“The familiar HACCP approach and the newer HARPC, featured as a part of the FSMA, are major talking points.“Finally, the need for hygienically designed processing and packaging equipment across all segments continues to be essential in maintaining sanitation standards in production areas, without risking potential downtime. Inspection solutions designed with hygienic principles in mind, which encompass high ingress protection standards such as IP69, are a key requirement for many industries.”The Product Inspection Division of Mettler Toledo incorporates the Safeline Metal Detection and X-ray Inspection, Garvens and Hi-Speed Checkweighing and the CI Vision and PCE Track & Trace brands. 
The Dairy Council in the UK is looking for the next generation of sport nutritionists to submit their research on the role of dairy in sport and exercise nutrition. The 2017 Dairy Council Sport Nutrition Award, in collaboration with the British Dietetic Association’s Sport and Exercise Nutrition register (SENr), is open to nutrition and sport students, and SENr registered graduates.Applicants must compose a formal, evidence-based article on the use of milk or dairy foods in sport nutrition and elite performance. This can be in the format of a dissertation, case study or literature review.Lydia Cooper, nutrition scientist at The Dairy Council, said research on milk and dairy and its relationship with exercise and performance nutrition is extensive, and is a growing field of study.She said the award is intended to inspire the next generation of sport nutritionists and researchers to further investigate dairy products.Winners may be invited to present their work at the 2018 SENr showcase event. Entries will be accepted until December 31, and the winners will be announced early 2018.Two prizes will be given for the best entries based on one of the following formats: primary research; case study; and literature review.The competition is open to graduates who are registered with SENr and nutrition and sport students studying at BSc, MSc or PhD levels.Those interested should submit applications to info@dairycouncil.org.uk , clearly marking submissions for the attention of The Dairy Council Award. 
Following a high earnings year in 2016, Land O’Lakes still posted solid gains of $110m in net earnings increasing to $3.7bn for Q1 2017. Earnings in dairy foods division, which includes the company's Land O’Lakes brand, were driven by strong volumes in foodservice and improved margins in retail-branded products.“Overall first quarter performance for 2017 continues the trend of year-over-year growth for our organization despite increased complexity and headwinds across the marketplace,” Land O’Lakes president and CEO, Chris Policinski, said.Land O’Lakes first quarter earnings benefitted from the acquisition of US specialty cheesemaker Vermont Creamery  in March 2017 for an undisclosed amount. The purchase of Vermont Creamery by Land O’Lakes was based on both companies’ value-added, branded approach to market products, DairyReporter previously reported.The company said it is committed to achieving environmental sustainability across the agricultural value chain and has partnered with Walmart in a new platform called Project Gigaton – an initiative aiming reduce greenhouse gas emission from Walmart suppliers’ operations and supply chains.“Our growing focus spans our farm-to-fork view of the marketplace as we continue to invest in value-added innovation in all four of our business units,” Policinski said.One of its business units, Land O’Lakes SUSTAIN has committed to addressing 100% of its farmer member milk supply by focusing on improvement of enteric emissions and yield potential, which includes greenhouse gas emissions manure systems.Land O’Lakes SUSTAIN plans to meet this commitment by equipping famers and ag-retailers with insights, technology, and tools to implement and track on-farm sustainability practices. Land O’Lakes is working on a public-private partnership with the Minnesota Department of Agriculture designed to assist with water and soil conservation.The company’s target is to reduce 10m metric tons of greenhouse gas emissions by 2025.In late April 2017, the Minnesota-based dairy company also appointed former chief accounting officer and treasurer, Bill Pieper, as the new CFO, replacing Dan Knutson who departs after 10 years in the position. Piper will report directly to Policinski.“[His] strategic financial management mindset has and will continue to support Land O’Lakes’ strong growth trajectory,” Policinski said in a statement.  
irmenichhas introduced a new range of sustainable and cost-effective natural vanilla solutions, to best support its customers in mitigating the impact of the Madagascar cyclone and the current record-high vanilla prices. The Flavor House has extended its natural vanilla range by diversifying its sources of origin to include Uganda, Indonesia and India, as well as, by developing innovative solutions from alternative natural sources.“With vanilla being the most popular flavor in the world, we immediately put our innovation to work to best support our customers to respond to today’s market scarcity and record prices,” said Chris Millington, President Flavors, Firmenich. “By rethinking our entire vanilla palette, we developed a unique range of natural flavors that offer an authentic taste profile, while meeting the market’s expectations for “clean” label and “natural”.”“Firmenich has the largest palette of vanilla from different origins and processes and uses this to create a full spectrum of taste profiles including tailor-made extracts and signature natural vanilla flavors,” said Benoit Petit, Vice President, End-to-End Naturals, Firmenich Flavors. “As prices continue to rise due to the recent Cyclone Enawo, our broad range of natural solutions from vanilla extracts from various origins, to natural flavors, are more relevant than ever to delight our customers and their consumers.”The Group has a history of partnering with its vanilla stakeholders such as in Uganda and Madagascar, to ensure the most traceable, ethical and sustainable value chain for the farmers and their communities. To scale up its impact Firmenich is an active member of the Sustainable Vanilla Initiative (SVI) dedicated to improving vanilla bean farmers’ livelihoods, as well as assuring the long-term stable supply of high quality vanilla beans.In light of the rising vanilla pod prices, Firmenich is exploring new business models and sharing innovation to turn today’s vanilla challenges into opportunities for its network of farmers in Uganda and Madagascar. Focus areas include the selection of crop varieties, crop rotation, soil management, all the way to promoting alternative cropping and reinforcing farming trainings.Responsible Sourcing in Uganda In 2008, Firmenich established one of the first public-private partnerships for responsible sourcing in the flavor and fragrance industry with Danida, the development arm of the Danish Government, which has a long-standing relationship with Uganda and Uvan Ltd., Uganda’s largest vanilla producer. This three-way partnership creates a sustainable supply of Ugandan vanilla beans through the education of more than 4,000 farmers on improved farming practices, as well as the implementation of social programs to improve living conditions of the farming communities.Responsible Sourcing in Madagascar With a long-established presence in Madagascar since 2005, Firmenich has developed a privileged partnership with Authentic, a member of our Naturals Together program, with the Savanille cooperative, representing 2,800 vanilla farmers across 38 villages. To best support the Savanille community, based on their input; and in collaboration with Authentic, Firmenich has:• Built 43 wells for drinking water, impacting 12,500 family members• Established a local school, and, in 2016 opened six more classrooms, benefitting 300 additional children• Set-up three plant nurseries for crop diversification• Added 24 pilot rice crops to help combat deforestation; integrating this food crop has enabled the community to produce rice for four consecutive years• Built a medical dispensary, serving 50 patients a week and supporting 40 births in 2016
Kellogg Company has been feeling the slowdown in demand for packaged foods as consumption trends change, and has adjusted its sales forecasts for full-year forecasts as a result. Reporting its first quarter results, Kellogg Company reported a net income of US$262.0 million, or 74 cents per share, up from US$175.0 million, 49 cents per share, for the same period last year.Revenue totaled US$3.26 billion, compared to US$3.40 billion for the same period last year and adjusted EPS was US$1.06.Kellogg’s first quarter earnings per share increased by 51% from the prior-year quarter, due to year-ago interest costs related to a bond tender and a lower tax rate, partially offset by higher upfront costs related to the Project K restructuring program and adverse currency translation.Non-GAAP, comparable earnings per share were up more than 10% from the year-earlier quarter, because of productivity savings and a planned discrete tax benefit, which more than offset the negative impact of currency translation. Non-GAAP, currency-neutral comparable earnings per share increased by more than 13% year-on-year.“In the first quarter, we managed through an unusually challenging environment for packaged food companies, including a period of industry-wide softening of consumption trends,” said John Bryant, Kellogg Company’s chairman and chief executive officer.“We got off to a slow start on net sales, as mentioned previously, but we expect sequential improvement in coming quarters, and our productivity initiatives enabled us to stay on track toward our full-year 2017 forecasts for currency-neutral comparable operating profit, earnings and cash flow.”“We continue to make progress on our 2020 Growth Plan, which directly addresses many of the revenue headwinds we are presently facing, and we have good visibility into continued currency-neutral operating-profit margin expansion.”According to the company, quarterly reported operating profit decreased because of higher restructuring charges related to the Project K restructuring program, which includes this year's exit from Direct Store Delivery sales and delivery system. Currency-neutral comparable operating profit increased because of efficiencies in Cost of Goods Sold and Selling General and Administrative expenses related to Zero-Based Budgeting and Project K, driving currency-neutral comparable operating profit-margin expansion across all four of our Regions.Soft Start to the YearLatin America and Asia-Pacific regions and parts of North America performed largely as expected, says Kellogg Company. However it’s US Morning Foods, US Snacks, and Europe region got off to a soft start to the year and it was in these businesses that the company saw “a meaningfully lower-than-trend net sales and operating profit performance.”While this weighed down overall results, as previously indicated, many of their underlying negative factors were largely concentrated in Q1.An industry-wide softening of consumption trends impacted most of Kellogg’s North America segments in January and February, compounded by trade-inventory reductions from the previous quarter.But the company is expecting that innovations planned for Special K and Mini Wheats cereals for the second quarter will be a hit with consumers.On snacks, the segment posted a decline in net sales, on both a reported and currency-neutral comparable basis which the company says, alongside higher up-front costs related to Project K restructuring, drove a decrease in reported and currency-neutral comparable operating profit.However, the company gained share in Crackers, led by its collective “Big 3” brands. It also gained share in other supported brands, like Rice Krispies Treats and Keebler cookies. In addition, it made good progress on preparing for its transition from Direct-Store Delivery to its Warehouse distribution system.The North America Other segment, which is comprised of the US Frozen Foods, Kashi, and Canadian businesses, posted a decrease in reported and currency-neutral comparable net sales, due to the unusually soft category-wide consumption in January and February for Frozen, trade inventory reductions in Kashi, and price elasticity impact in Canada. On a reported and currency- neutral comparable basis, the segment's operating profit and operating-profit margin increased strongly in the quarter. Performance improved in March, and stronger commercial plans are in place for Q2.Meanwhile, Kellogg Europe posted a decrease in reported net sales and currency-neutral comparable net sales. The company says that on top of a persistently challenging environment in the U.K., Europe's results in Q1 were further affected by since-resolved customer negotiations related to pricing actions. Operating profit declined on a reported basis and currency-neutral comparable basis, due to the sales decline and adverse currency translation, but reported and currency-neutral comparable-basis profit margins continued to increase. Kellogg Europe expects sequentially improved performance as the year progresses.Looking ahead and taking into consideration the slow start in Q1, and to reflect only moderate improvement in developed markets recent consumption trends, the company now forecasts a decline in currency-neutral comparable net sales of about 3% in 2017, versus previous guidance of approximately 2%.
Eating insects instead of beef could help tackle climate change by reducing harmful emissions linked to livestock production, research suggests.Replacing half of the meat eaten worldwide with crickets and mealworms would cut farmland use by a third, substantially reducing emissions of greenhouse gases, researchers say.While consumers' reluctance to eat insects may limit their consumption, even a small increase would bring benefits, the team says. This could potentially be achieved by using insects as ingredients in some pre-packaged foods.Using data collected primarily by the UN's Food and Agriculture Organization, scientists have compared the environmental impacts of conventional meat production with those of alternative sources of food. It is the first study to do so.Researchers at the University of Edinburgh and Scotland's Rural College considered a scenario in which half of the current mix of animal products is replaced by insects, lab-grown meat or imitation meat.They found that insects and imitation meat - such as soybean-based foods like tofu - are the most sustainable as they require the least land and energy to produce. Beef is by far the least sustainable, the team says.In contrast to previous studies, lab-grown meat was found to be no more sustainable than chicken or eggs, requiring an equivalent area of land but using more energy in production.The team says halving global consumption of animal products by eating more insects or imitation meat would free up 1680 million hectares of land - 70 times the size of the UK.Similar land savings could also be made by switching from the current mix of animal products to diets higher in chicken and eggs, the team says. They found that the land required to produce these was only marginally greater that for insects and imitation meat.As well as being a major contributor to human-induced greenhouse gas emissions, current livestock production has other environmental impacts. Globally, pasture covers twice the area of cropland, and livestock consume around a third of all harvested crops, researchers say.The research, published in the journal Global Food Security, was supported by the UK's Global Food Security Programme and the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme. It was carried out in collaboration with Scotland's Rural College, the University of York, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology and the Centre for Australian Weather and Climate Research.Lead author Dr. Peter Alexander, of the University of Edinburgh's School of GeoSciences and Scotland's Rural College, said: “A mix of small changes in consumer behavior, such as replacing beef with chicken, reducing food waste and potentially introducing insects more commonly into diets, would help achieve land savings and a more sustainable food system.”Professor Dominic Moran, of the University of York and Scotland's Rural College, said: “The environmental challenges facing the global agricultural industry are increasing and this paper has studied some of the alternative foods that we can introduce into our diets to alleviate some of this pressure.”
A recent study conducted by Technomic has revealed insight on Latinos’ foodservice behavior, attitudes and preferences as well as the latest trends for Latin American cuisine.Latinos currently comprise 17% of the total US population, meaning the Latino population and its spending power is continuing to grow and impact the US foodservice industry. With their incomes rising, Latinos are visiting restaurants more often and broadening the types of restaurants they visit compared to two years ago.“While there is now more opportunity to drive traffic and sales among Latinos, their broadening consideration set will create increased competition for their foodservice dollars,” explains Anne Mills, manager of consumer insights. “Keeping abreast of how the Latino population is evolving, and how this impacts their patronage, need states and preferences will help create menu, product and marketing strategies that effectively resonate with this young consumer base.”Key takeaways from the report include:Three-fifths (62%) of Latinos expect their personal financial situation to improve in the next year, with 35% of these consumers saying it will improve slightlyTwo-fifths (41%) of Latinos and 54% of Spanish-dominant Latinos say that they are now more likely to visit restaurants that publicly support Latinos compared to in 2015About half (49%) of Latinos say loyalty/rewards programs encourage them to visit a specific restaurant over another, up from 42% in 2015
In January 2016, the EU imposed a maximum limit of inorganic arsenic on manufacturers in a bid to mitigate associated health risks. Researchers at the Institute for Global Food Security at Queen's have found that little has changed since this law was passed and that 50 per cent of baby rice food products still contain an illegal level of inorganic arsenic.Professor Meharg, lead author of the study and Professor of Plant and Soil Sciences at Queen's, said: “This research has shown direct evidence that babies are exposed to illegal levels of arsenic despite the EU regulation to specifically address this health challenge. Babies are particularly vulnerable to the damaging effects of arsenic that can prevent the healthy development of a baby's growth, IQ and immune system to name but a few.”Rice has, typically, ten times more inorganic arsenic than other foods and chronic exposure can cause a range of health problems including developmental problems, heart disease, diabetes and nervous system damage.As babies are rapidly growing they are at a sensitive stage of development and are known to be more susceptible to the damaging effects of arsenic, which can inhibit their development and cause long-term health problems. Babies and young children under the age of five also eat around three times more food on a body weight basis than adults, which means that, relatively, they have three times greater exposures to inorganic arsenic from the same food item.The research findings, published in the PLOS ONE journal today, compared the level of arsenic in urine samples among infants who were breast-fed or formula-fed before and after weaning. A higher concentration of arsenic was found in formula-fed infants, particularly among those who were fed non-dairy formulas which includes rice-fortified formulas favored for infants with dietary requirements such as wheat or dairy intolerance. The weaning process further increased infants' exposure to arsenic, with babies five times more exposed to arsenic after the weaning process, highlighting the clear link between rice-based baby products and exposure to arsenic.In this new study, researchers at Queen's also compared baby food products containing rice before and after the law was passed and discovered that higher levels of arsenic were in fact found in the products since the new regulations were implemented. Nearly 75 per cent of the rice-based products specifically marketed for infants and young children contained more than the standard level of arsenic stipulated by the EU law.Rice and rice-based products are a popular choice for parents, widely used during weaning, and to feed young children, due to its availability, nutritional value and relatively low allergic potential.Professor Meharg explained: “Products such as rice-cakes and rice cereals are common in babies' diets. This study found that almost three-quarters of baby crackers, specifically marketed for children exceeded the maximum amount of arsenic.”Previous research led by Professor Meharg highlighted how a simple process of percolating rice could remove up to 85 per cent of arsenic. Professor Meharg adds: “Simple measures can be taken to dramatically reduce the arsenic in these products so there is no excuse for manufacturers to be selling baby food products with such harmful levels of this carcinogenic substance.“Manufacturers should be held accountable for selling products that are not meeting the required EU standard. Companies should publish the levels of arsenic in their products to prevent those with illegal amounts from being sold. This will enable consumers to make an informed decision, aware of any risks associated before consuming products containing arsenic.”
Unicorn Ingredients, British supplier of ingredients for the bakery  market has recently announced the launch of a new brand of organic seeds. Available for food manufacturers and the health food retail sector, Copihue is a premium organic range comprising of some of the most popular seeds in today’s market, including sesame, pumpkin, poppy, sunflower, millet, flax, linseed, buckwheat, quinoa and chia.Copihue is a flowering vine that is the national flower of Chile and is used to make honey. Unicorn already has the registered trademark and supplies Copihue branded honey to China. As many of its organic seeds are sourced in China the decision to choose Copihue as the brand name for the new organic seeds was a logical progression.“Our organic seeds business is growing and although it is still a small proportion of our overall seeds portfolio, we feel it is important to give it an identity all of its own, which enables the market to distinguish our premium organic seeds from other products,” explains joint managing director, Frank Horan. “Copihue will become synonymous with quality and consistency, backed by our expertise in supply chain management, which provides full traceability of the seeds from grower to the food manufacturer.”Frank toldFoodIngredientsFirst: “Copihue is Unicorn Ingredients' new Trademark for organic seeds so we can give this part of the business its own identity. But we do also sell branded Copihue honey in China, and have sold organic seeds as part of the Unicorn Ingredients product range in the UK for a longtime.”“We hope to broaden the Cophihue organic range as we go, and feel confident in the quality performance,” explains Horan.Is this likely to drive further development in organic seed sector? “Perhaps by giving some certainty over the quality performance of the product, which has been variable from some sources in the past,” he notes.Unicorn Ingredients holds the BRC Standard for Agents and Brokers as a broker of seeds as well as oils (sesame and olive), honey and pulses, providing customers with a guarantee of quality assurance combined with the convenience of hassle-free sourcing from one respected supplier.by Elizabeth Green
MEPs oppose EU Commission plans to authorise imports of products derived from or containing herbicide resistant genetically modified (GM) maize and cotton, in two resolutions voted on Thursday. They highlight the concerns raised by independent research and member states, and reiterate Parliament’s call for a reform of the EU’s GMO authorisation procedure.The resolution opposing the placing on the market of products containing maize DAS-40278-9 highlights the concerns raised by independent research about the risks of the 2,4D herbicide, to which the maize is resistant, regarding embryo development, birth defects and endocrine disruption.MEPs stress that many critical comments were issued by Member States during the three-months consultation period before approval, referring inter alia to missing or insufficient data, contradictory statements and poor test design.The resolution was adopted with 35 votes to 19.In a separate resolution, adopted with 38 votes to 15, MEPs say that imports of products from genetically modified cotton GHB119 should not be authorised as this would encourage the use of glufosinate ammonium-based herbicides (to which GHB119 is resistant) in the world, while glufosinate is classified as toxic for reproduction.Critical comments were also submitted by Member States, MEPs say, highlighting shortcomings in the environmental risk assessment and missing data.Next stepsBoth texts, tabled by MEPs Bart Staes (Greens/EFA, BE) Lynn Boylan (GUE/NGL, IE), Guillaume Balas (S&D, FR), Eleonora Evi (EFDD, IT), Valentinas Mazuronis (ALDE, LT) and Sirpa Pietikäinen (EPP, FI) will be put to a vote by the full House during the 15-18 May plenary session in Strasbourg.
German online shoppers in Berlin and Potsdam can now order a range of groceries from Amazon Fresh which has launched in the cities and has plans for a nationwide roll out in the future.Following months of speculation in the German retail space, Amazon Fresh finally announced its entrance into the country earlier this week with 85,000 items which is more than the average bricks and mortar supermarket.DHL is the logistical partner and will be making the deliveries.AmazonFresh is available for members of the online giant’s Prime subscription service and the move in Germany is expected to push online sales of food which have reportedly been sluggish so far. Forecasts are that it will also disrupt the traditional retailers.AmazonFresh is also partnering with some local suppliers and of the thousands of groceries available, Amazon Fresh items include chocolate, coffee and bread from 25 local stores for US$10.87 a month for unlimited deliveries on orders over €40 (US$43.85).In addition to collaborating with the local enterprises, including coffee company Sagers and chocolate manufacturers Rausch, Swiss-owned supermarket chain based in Germany, Tegut, will be selling its private labels.Amazon initially launched its fresh food delivery service in 2007 in Seattle and over the years has expanded to several other cities in the US, followed by a London launch in 2016.Online shoppers can take advantage of flexible delivery options Monday to Friday. If an order is placed by midday, the delivery will be made in time for dinner, according to Amazon Fresh. And if late-night orders are placed up until 11pm, groceries will be delivered the next day in a selected two-hour delivery spot.
Secretary Sonny Perdue has announced that the first shipment of fresh US beef has arrived in Brazil following a 13-year hiatus. The entrance of American beef into the Brazilian market ushers in promising long-term economic opportunity for US beef producers.“With Brazil’s large market reopened to the United States, US beef exports are poised for new growth. I look forward to Brazilians getting the opportunity to eat delicious American beef, because once they taste it, they’ll want more of it,” said Secretary Perdue.Additionally, USDA’s Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) has provided documentation and information on the U.S. food safety requirements and standards for beef. Following numerous technical discussions and meetings, Brazil officially reopened the market on August 1, 2016 based on the United States’ classification by the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) as a negligible risk country for BSE.
erry, the global taste & nutrition and consumer foods group, issues the following Interim Management Statement for the first quarter ended 31 March 2017. This statement is issued in conjunction with the Group’s Annual General Meeting which is being held today.Kerry Group Chief Executive Stan McCarthy said; “Our first quarter highlights a good volume driven performance across Group businesses, maintaining the momentum reported in 2016. The Group expects to achieve good revenue growth and 5% to 9% growth in adjusted earnings per share in 2017, as previously guided.”Business PerformanceKerry Group achieved a solid start to the year, maintaining the positive business momentum reported in Q4 2016. While consumer spending remained constrained in many geographic markets, health conscious consumer trends continue to drive development of authentic, tasteful, nutritious, clean label, convenient food and beverage products.Kerry’s customer alliances continue to drive a strong innovation pipeline in response to consumer requirements. In particular demand for reduced sugar, salt and artificial ingredients is accelerating product development demands across all end-use-markets in all regions. Business development in the foodservice sector remains solid due to increased out-of-home consumption. The Group maintained double digit volume growth in the Asia-Pacific region.Despite the uncertainty following the UK electorate decision to leave the European Union, Kerry Foods continued to perform well delivering sustained volume growth. However the division’s trading margin was impacted by the currency transaction impact of the sterling devaluation.Groupwide business volumes grew by 3.8% and pricing increased by 1.3% in the quarter. Reported revenues increased by 4.5% reflecting the business volume growth, positive pricing, adverse transaction currency impact of 0.4%, adverse translation currency impact of 0.6% and the effect of acquisitions of 0.4%.The Group trading profit margin was maintained, reflecting a 20 basis points improvement in Taste & Nutrition, positive underlying margin improvement in Kerry Foods offset by the aforementioned sterling transaction impact resulting in a 70 basis points margin reduction, and an increased spend on the Kerryconnect Program.Business Reviews Taste & NutritionThe Group’s global Taste & Nutrition businesses delivered 4.1% volume growth in the quarter. Pricing increased by 1.4%. Divisional trading profit margin increased by 20 basis points.Americas RegionThe Americas region achieved 3.8% volume growth and a solid performance across North and South American end-use-markets. Kerry’s clean label technologies and Kerry’s authentic savory taste continues to deliver good growth across the meat, prepared meals, dairy and bakery sectors. Smoke & Grill technologies, benefiting from the Red Arrow acquisition, again recorded strong growth. Dairy & Culinary also maintained a solid performance particularly in Brazil. Foodservice and Direct-to-Retail segments provided good growth opportunities throughout the Americas.  Channel development through Kerry’s beverage offerings were assisted by Island Oasis and Insight Beverages. Kerry branded beverage products also performed well particularly in Latin America. Development in the LATAM soft drinks sector was subdued due to consumer trends. The snacks sector also weakened in Central American markets and the North American R.T.E. cereals sector remained challenging but Kerry continued to progress development in the nutritional bar category.In the pharma sector, cell nutrition maintained strong growth. Kerry’s Wellmune branded immune enhancing ingredients business continued to broaden market reach into wider applications.EMEA RegionMarket conditions in the EMEA region were broadly unchanged but Kerry achieved an improved performance with business volumes increased by 1.9% compared to the same period of 2016. Good development momentum was achieved in the meat sector, particularly through foodservice applications. Savory Taste technologies benefited from clean label trends. Dairy & Culinary maintained good growth, in particular through Kerry’s unique ‘infused oil’ applications. Sugar reduction remains a major focus throughout EMEA end-usemarkets. Beverage systems benefited from out-of-home consumption trends. Market conditions in Cereal & Sweet sectors were unchanged. The QSR sector provided solid growth opportunities in Russia and conditions in MENAT and Sub-Saharan Africa stabilized. Returns from international primary dairy markets improved due to constrained production in some major exporting countries.Asia-Pacific RegionKerry’s strong business development performance continued throughout Asia Pacific markets. Business volumes in the quarter grew by 10.4%. Beverage taste technologies and systems grew strongly, particularly in the foodservice and c-store channels. Nutritional applications provided solid growth in China. Culinary snack systems maintained good growth in South East Asia. Culinary sauce systems performed well in Singapore, Malaysia, China and Australia. Solid growth was achieved in Japan and South Korea.As announced in February, the Group has acquired Jurong, China based Tianning Flavors, which strengthens Kerry’s savory and sweet flavor development capability in the Chinese food and beverage industry, and Adelaide, Australia based Taste Master – a leading flavors provider to the beverage, sweet and savory snack, and meat & culinary industries in Australia and New Zealand. The acquisition of Taste Master was completed in mid-March and the acquisition of Tianning Flavours was completed in April.Since the period end, the Group has reached agreement to acquire Hangzhou, China based Hangman Flavors – a leading producer of sweet and savory flavors serving the beverage, ice cream, confectionery and snacks sectors in China.This acquisition program and organic investment in Group facilities continues strategic expansion of the Group’s Asian footprint to capitalize on market growth opportunities and meet customer requirements across the region’s fast growing markets. A major expansion program at the Group’s Nantong China production facility was completed prior to year-end and two new state-of-the-art production facilities were commissioned in Batangas, the Philippines and in Cikarang, Indonesia. A new production facility is also being established in India to support taste and clean-label technology delivery.Consumer FoodsThe Group’s consumer foods division, Kerry Foods, delivered 2.3% business volume growth relative to Q1 2016. Pricing increased by 1.0% on average across the first quarter. The divisional trading profit margin decreased by 70 basis points as the underlying margin improvement was more than offset by transaction currency headwinds.‘Mattessons’ maintained growth in the meat snacking category. The GB sausage marketplace remained challenging. ‘Fire & Smoke’ branded cooked meats performed well in the UK delicatessen and pre-pack cooked meat categories. Kerry Foods’ chilled and frozen meals businesses performed in line with expectations.‘Cheestrings’ maintained growth in the UK market despite operational issues at the Charleville production plant. ‘Cheestrings Scoffies’ achieved listings with all major retail groups and the launch of ‘Go Go’s’ in February proved successful to-date with a range of compartment snacking trays for adults. ‘Yollies’ continued to achieve good growth in the children’s yoghurt snack sector. ‘Cheestrings’ growth strategy in mainland Europe continued to be progressed satisfactorily.Market conditions in the UK private label spreads category stabilized during the quarter where Kerry Foods’ spreadable butter technologies continued to successfully progress market development. The Irish spreads market continued to reflect a decline in volume and value but ‘Dairygold’ again grew market share assisted by new product launches.Financial ReviewAt the end of March net debt stood at €1.2 billion, compared to €1.3 billion at year-end reflecting strong cash generation in the period. On 20 January 2017, the Group repaid US$192m of Senior Notes which matured on that date. The Group’s consolidated balance sheet remains strong which will facilitate the continued organic and acquisitive growth of Group businesses.
uPontand The Dow Chemical Company have announced that China’s Ministry of Commerce (MOFCOM) has granted conditional regulatory approval of their proposed merger of equals. Approval is conditional onDuPontand Dow fulfilling commitments given to MOFCOM in connection with the clearance. This approval continues the progress that the companies have made to secure regulatory clearances around the world for their procompetitive merger, which will drive innovation and competition.Specifically, and consistent with commitments already made to obtain the European Commission’s regulatory approval for the proposed merger of equals, Dow and DuPont will divest certain parts of DuPont’s crop protection portfolio and research and development pipeline and organization and Dow’s global Ethylene Acrylic Acid copolymers and ionomers business.In addition, Dow and DuPont have made commitments related to the supply and distribution in China of certain herbicide and insecticide ingredients and formulations for rice crops for five years after the closing of the proposed merger of equals.China is a critical market for both Dow and DuPont and will be for the three intended independent companies that will be created following the merger. The intended three-way separation is expected to unlock significant value for all stakeholders as each company will be a growth-oriented leader in attractive segments where global challenges are generating strong demand for their distinctive offerings.Dow and DuPont continue to work constructively with regulators in the remaining relevant jurisdictions to obtain clearance for the merger, which they are confident will be achieved. On March 27, the European Commission conditionally approved the merger. The companies reaffirm their expectation for closing of the merger to occur between August 1, 2017 and September 1, 2017, with the intended spin-offs to occur within 18 months of closing. The companies expect that the first step of the intended separation process will be the spin-off of the Materials Science Company, assuming such sequencing would allow for the completion of all intended spin-offs within 18 months of merger closing and would not adversely impact the value of the intended spin-offs.
With global blueberry production up 40 percent 2012-2016 and projected to reach 658 million kilograms this year, the US Highbush Blueberry Council (USHBC) is focused on driving demand upward on the same trajectory. US per capita blueberry consumption grew 599 percent from 1994-2014 and the USHBC’s newest research indicates further room for growth.In late 2016, the USHBC issued an opportunity assessment study to examine which consumer and business segments are best suited to absorb the building volume of berries coming to market. “We were pleased to find that, among the top fruits – including bananas, strawberries, apples, grapes and citrus – blueberries are the only one expecting increased consumption in 2017,” says Mark Villata, Executive Director of the USHBC. “The research also helped us refine and expand our consumer and business target audiences so we’re able to concentrate on those with the greatest growth potential.”The study found that heavy and moderate blueberry users, who represent half of the US population (25 percent each), show the most growth potential of all user segments.Heavy users consume 19+ cups per year, are mainly ages 25-45, have children in the home and span all ethnicities. Of this group, 73 percent see blueberries as a part of their lifestyle; they will go out of their way to purchase blueberries, and take time to understand the nutritional composition of blueberry-containing foods. Fresh and frozen consumption among this segment is expected to increase by 5 percent in 2017.Moderate users consume 6-18 cups per year, and span all ages and ethnicities. Blueberries are projected to go from moderate users’ #6 preferred fruit to #3 in 2017. Among the moderate user segment, fresh and frozen consumption is expected to increase by 12 percent in 2017.These key findings have influenced the Council’s latest strategies to grow demand, which include targeting marketing campaigns at moderate users, and engaging heavy users to influence moderate users’ blueberry purchases.“Our summer campaign launching in mid-May will build on those strategies and others,” Villata says. “We’re developing new recipes and promoting them in a way to fit moderate users’ needs, from offering simple, visual recipe guides to partnering with individuals, food and fitness influencers who evoke trust and can aid in establishing blueberries as our target users’ favorite summer food.”
As speculation continues over exactly what Brexit will mean in terms of trade deals, tariffs, border controls and a range of other concerns, the UK’s Food and Drink Federation (FDF) has put forward five key policies it believes the next government should implement so food and farming sectors thrive on an international scale.Contributing £28.2 billion (US$36.2 billion) to the economy annually and employing more than 400,000 people throughout Britain, the food and drink industry is the largest manufacturing sector in the UK.Discussing the launch of the manifesto, FDF Director General Ian Wright CBE said: “The next six weeks are the pivotal time for the food and drink industry to make its case to those who aspire to form the next Government - a Government which will lead us through Brexit negotiations and the uncertain period that follows.”“Food is a matter of national security. Food and farming is the sector most impacted by exiting the EU. It is imperative that the new Government recognize this, and the importance of the food and drink industry in relation to the success of the wider UK economy.“We urge policymakers and candidates of all parties to join us in our shared mission: to continue to provide consumers with safe, affordable and nutritious food and drink and unlock our growth and productivity potential.”The first of the five policies is to secure the best possible Brexit for food and drink, including a transition phase to avoid any "cliff edge" scenario.“Food and farming is the sector most impacted by Brexit. Whether it is access to future workforce, the shape of the regulatory regime, our trading relationships, or the all-Ireland agri-food supply chain, the long-term future for UK food and drink is dependent on the deal the next Government secures,” says the FDF.“Currency fluctuation has already squeezed many producers, with over 90% of FDF members reporting price rises for essential ingredients and raw materials in our recent survey. As essential partners to the UK's farmers, primary producers and fishing industry, we are also reliant on a stable and sustainable domestic supply base.”FDF says the industry is ready to seize new opportunities in exports and domestic sourcing but if Britain was to return to  World Trade Organization (WTO) rules for trading with the EU, then food and drink exports imports would face significantly higher tariffs.Secondly, FDF wants the new government to work in partnership with industry to tackle obesity through an holistic, evidence-based approach, with calorie reduction at its heart.FDF agrees with dietitians that it is wrong to focus on one single nutrient or ingredient and that we must look for a 'whole diet and lifestyle' solution. The emphasis should be on calories, as undue focus on any one nutrient risks misleading the consumer, says FDF and the next Government should also champion the role of appropriate portion sizing, shifting marketing investment behind healthier options and methods to drive behavior change among consumers.Reformulation takes time, involves technical challenges and incurs great costs. The next Government should fund pre-competitive research through the Research Councils with world leading UK universities and improve technology transfer through funding of commercialization initiatives, such as those supported by Innovate UK, according to FDF. This will help keep new product prices competitive, ensuring these are truly affordable to all and helping to alleviate health inequalities.New OpportunitiesFDF wants the new government to turbo charge sector-specific exports to help smaller firms take advantage of new opportunities.“With only 20 percent of food and drink manufacturers actively exporting, we know there is huge untapped potential among SMEs to meet rising demand. We are looking for the next Government to work with us so our firms are ready to take advantage of growing demand, including new opportunities in non-EU countries. This can help prepare the UK's wider food chain for a more competitive future outside the CAP,” says FDF.However, the FDF says the biggest barrier to exploiting this potential is the fragmentation of specialist export support in the UK. SMEs in other countries typically benefit from more generous sector-specific support, with a single point of contact making support easier to access and so it is calling on the new Government to work in partnership with industry to scale-up its provision of specialist export support in food and drink to take advantage of increased demand for UK products overseas and the opportunities that leaving the EU is expected to create.Another point from the FDF is for more support for its ambition for an industrial strategy sector deal which drives transformational industry growth, so the industry can continue to provide consumers with great choice and quality products.Specifically the FDF wants the new government to work with food chain partners to deliver a safe, secure, affordable, resilient and sustainable food chain for now and for future generations, including support to grow a more competitive and productive supply base, delivering resource efficiency, quality and traceability from farm to fork.And finally, the FDF wants to work with government to develop home-grown talent, boost skills and apprenticeships and believes the next government must commit to long-term investment in skills and apprenticeships so the UK remains the destination of choice for multinational food and drink manufacturers.The UK food and drink industry faces a looming skills gap due to demographic change, compounded by the uncertainty that a new immigration policy may put at risk the UK’s valued EU workforce, and leave the sector with an immediate skills gap. Over a third of the food and drink workforce is set to retire by 2024 and the industry will need 140,000 new recruits to fill this looming shortage.“UK food and drink manufacturers, like the rest of the agri-food supply chain, have benefited from bringing in labor from the EU. Almost a third (29 per cent) of our workforce are EU nationals, with a high percentage carrying out vital production, technical and specialist roles,” says FDF.It wants government to deliver co-ordinated careers action and a more strategic approach to engage with schools in order to encourage home-grown talent to replace the ageing workforce and helping to reduce reliance on EU national workers in the longer-term.
Following yesterday’s House of Lords report into the challenges and opportunities caused by Brexit, the alliance for better food and farming, Sustain has criticized the government for its lack of focus on environment and food standards.The report looks at the implications of Brexit for UK agriculture and food, particularly the implications of leaving the EU's Common Agriculture Policy and the Single Market and was reported extensively in FoodIngredientsFirst yesterday.However, the campaign group - which advocates food and agriculture policies and practices that enhance the health and welfare of people and animals, improve the working and living environment, promote equity and enrich society and culture - now says it’s vital for the next Government to build a coherent plan to address all key aspects of the food system.“This report rightly highlights the risks of Brexit for the UK food industry but does not focus enough on environment and food standards to provide the balanced and coherent picture that this country will need for the challenges ahead,” says Vicki Hird, Farm Campaign Coordinator of Sustain."The report is strong in outlining the opportunities and calls for a reasonable transition phase to help farmers in particular to adjust to the loss of a crucial European farm and rural subsidy regime, and access to overseas workers to the threat of higher trade tariffs.""But it is crucial that the next Government builds on this so we see a clear and coherent plan - developed with input from all stakeholders - which addresses all aspects of the complex food system in an integrated way. There must be no trade-off between strong environment, farm or food standards and trade deals for instance."
An online knowledge-sharing platform designed to maximise the potential of whey protein and lactose has been set up byArla Foods Ingredients.The new Whey & Protein Blog –www.thewheyprotein.blog– will act as an impartial, non-commercial focal point where individuals, businesses and experts with an interest in whey protein and lactose can share information. In line with this spirit of neutrality, it will not be used as a medium for promoting brands or companies and their products.Writing in the site’s opening blog, Arla Foods Ingredients CEO Henrik Andersen said: “While I find it truly amazing just how much many clever people around the world have been able to get out of whey to date, this is a fast-expanding field and we’re still just scratching the surface. Scientific efforts are continually discovering new things we can do with whey.”Mr Andersen (pictured) said the Whey & Protein Blog would be “a place for all industry experts to share knowledge aboutClick to Enlargeand viewpoints on whey protein and lactose and, in particular, their documented or potential benefits to the world.” He added: “Alongside such benefits, we’ll also be prioritising issues of quality and food safety and providing or inviting critical evaluations and commentaries, too.”Among the first contributors to the hub is Professor Luc van Loon, who is a renowned expert on sports nutrition at Maastricht University in the Netherlands. In his post, Prof. van Loon explains the important role of dietary protein after exercise to promote muscle protein synthesis and, as such, support the skeletal muscle adaptive response to exercise training.Also writing for the new site is Lindsey Ormond, Nutritionist & Business Development Consultant at LO Health Solutions, whose blog offers an overview of the latest developments in measuring protein quality. She addresses the limitations of the PDCAAS method and the strengths of DIAAS, which in 2013 replaced PDCAAS as the Food & Agriculture Organisation’s recommended method for comparing the nutritional value of various sources of protein – and which has found dairy protein to be superior.Speaking following the launch of the Whey & Protein Blog, Mr Andersen commented: “This knowledge-sharing platform will be a trustworthy and independent industry voice that focuses on the facts. We invite everybody to read the posts that are published and also to submit their own for inclusion.”He continued: “We’re interested in all topics, including health, consumer trends, supply chain matters and marketing. But it’s not a commercial channel to promote companies and brands. The emphasis will be on creating a communal space where everybody involved in the whey protein and lactose industries can share news and opinions, and bounce ideas off each other.”
The consultation for a new policy on independence at the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) draws to a close this week and campaigners have told FoodNavigator that the final document won’t be worth the paper it’s written on“My problem is that they pretend to be independent from the food industry, but they’re not,” explained Martin Pigeon, researcher and campaigner on agribusiness issues at Corporate Europe Observatory (CEO). “You can spend ten minutes looking at a panel and come up with a scandal.”Pigeon has published a circumscribed list of them . It starts with the Bánáti affair in September 2010, in which the chair of EFSA’s management board, Diána Bánáti, reportedly failed to mention that she was also on the board of ILSI, a non-governmental body largely funded by food, chemical and pharma companies. There was no evidence that the links with ILSI influenced her actions at EFSA, but it did raise a “perception issue”, admitted the authority’s executive director at the time, Catherine Geslain-Lanéelle. Lessons were learned, she said. “Public perception is important; we need trust.”But since then, EFSA has found itself mired in scandal after scandal; and most involve industry ties that for campaigners – and increasingly the public and politicians – are too close for comfort. Consider the investigation by CEO in October 2013 – and picked up across the world – that showed almost 60% of EFSA experts have “at least one conflict of interest”; experts with conflicts of interest also dominated all but one of the authority’s panels.Some have suggested it’s a witch-hunt. In April, the authority’s executive director Bernard Uhl, told Reuters that his team is facing unprecedented criticism after concluding that glyphosate – the world’s most widely used herbicide – was “unlikely” to pose a carcinogenic risk to humans. The European Agency for Chemical products (ECHA) has since agreed with this appraisal . However, it remains at odds with the findings of the International Agency for Research on Cancer – that glyphosate is “probably carcinogenic”Glyphosate is one of the very few scientific opinions EFSA has issued in the past 15 years that has been challenged (and there have been 8,000 or so of them), Uhl explained in the interview . Those attempting to discredit his agency over the assessment are thus undermining science to pursue a “political agenda”.Others maintain that there is no smoke without fire. Just last week, an investigation by EU Observer and Dutch magazine OneWorld  revealed that EFSA’s glyphosate evaluation relied on scientific evidence that was written or influenced by Monsanto, which uses the chemical in its leading weedkiller Roundup.EFSA played down the investigation, but with every negative headline trust in the authority erodes further. A 2010 Eurobarometer survey  commissioned by EFSA found that 64% of Europeans were confident about the information issued by both EFSA and national food safety agencies. What would the result be today?  EFSA’s new policy on independence and scientific decision-making is an opportunity to kick-start a new era of openness. ©iStock/shironosovThe European Commission is certainly aware of the challenge it faces to restore trust in ‘the system’ following controversies linked to just a handful of substances. In March, a group of green MEPs writing about glyphosate highlighted that the commission had held an internal expert meeting entitled ‘possible improvements to the integrity of academic laboratory testing and reproducibility’. They also noted that the EU’s executive branch “specifically referred to ‘selective reporting of results, pressure of academics to publish, and lack of standardisation of reference measurement procedures and reference materials’.”There is little doubt some of the issues have become political. The assessments are also fiercely complicated and can be simplified and sensationalised by parts of the media – as the health and food safety commissioner noted in October . “In most of these science-related issues, people tend to look for ‘black and white’ answers where almost always a degree of ‘grey’ — of uncertainty — is inevitable,” said Vytenis Andriukaitis.“This uncertainty can sow the seeds of doubt in people’s minds and can be exploited by the media to sensationally highlight certain risks.”Improved communication and greater transparency would certainly help nip some of the criticisms and controversies in the bud; which makes EFSA’s new policy on independence and scientific decision-making the perfect opportunity to kick-start a new era of openness.The definition of conflict of interest, cooling off periods and transparency are all up for review; a public consultation is also open until the end of this week (May 5, 2017) and a draft proposal was published earlier this year. But campaigners have told FoodNavigator that they expect very little to change. “EFSA has to demonstrate some basic will [to cut its ties with industry], but I’m not very hopeful,” explained CEO’s Pigeon.On the plus side, the new draft  does include a two-year cooling-off period for “all managerial roles, employment and consultancies, even of an occasional nature”. However, this still leaves a gaping loophole, Pigeon explained: EFSA will only assess experts’ interests according to the specific mandate of the panel they want to join or are already a member of.This also puts it at odds with the European Parliament, which has repeatedly demanded a comprehensive cooling-off period for experts. Indeed, last week MEPs on the committee for budgetary control called on EFSA to “incorporate into its new independence policy a two-year cooling-off period for all material interests related to the companies whose products are assessed by the authority and to any organisations funded by them”.The committee also said  it “regrets” that the authority has not included research funding in the list of interests to be covered by the two-year cooling-off period and called on EFSA to “swiftly implement the measure in line with the discharge authority's repeated requests”.An EFSA spokesman told FoodNavigator that the authority has a “robust system in place to safeguard its independence” and “welcomes all contributions” to its policy review process.Some would argue that a more contributions from the EU’s coffers wouldn’t go amiss either.The European Border Agency, Frontex, has double the budget EFSA has, Pigeon explained, and is “paying the price of political priorities”. This lack of resources explains why it is industry experts that often end up sitting on panels (positions are unpaid). MEPs last week said they were “convinced the authority should be endowed with a sufficient budget to hire independent in-house experts with no conflicts of interest”. This would help develop a public interest ethos, cut ties with industry and remove EFSA from the public microscope. “The independence of experts that will look at data offered by industry is the only credibility EFSA has left,” said Pigeon. “It has to get that right.” 
Nestlé have reached an agreement to sell a range of Italian brands to FRoSTA in a deal that further strengthens the German group’s presence in the frozen food sector. The brands—La Valle Degli Orti, Sea Fresh and Surgela—represent a range of pastas, pizzas and frozen vegetables and will now fall under the control of the FRoSTA Group, a company operating in Italy since 1989.The Group, which has an annual turnover of €440 million, employs around 1,600 employees in facilities that span eight countries including Germany, Poland and Hungary.The deal is part of Nestlé’s development plan announced last December, which will see its Benevento factory become "an international hub" for pizza production under the Buitoni brand.The Swiss food giant also sold six confectionery brands  and a biscuit brand  in Italy last June as part of efforts to cast aside product ranges that were not core to its business.Italy is the ninth biggest market for Nestlé in terms of turnover. Its Italian operations include 13 factories and more than 5,500 employees. 
Gluten-free diets should not be encouraged for those without coeliac disease, as restricting gluten may result in low intake of beneficial nutrients found in whole grains, say researchers.A 24-year long study published in The BMJ this week has said people without coeliac disease shouldn't be cutting out gluten from their diets as it could mean they are missing out on "heart healthy" whole grains.The researchers warn that "promotion of gluten-free diets for the purpose of coronary heart disease prevention among asymptomatic people without coeliac disease should not be recommended".The trend of gluten-free or low gluten diets has increased recently due to beliefs that gluten can cause risk of chronic conditions such as coronary heart disease.Gluten is a storage protein found in wheat, barley, rye and oats, and can cause inflammation and intestinal damage to those with coeliac disease.Sufferers of coeliac are also at a higher risk of coronary heart disease, which can be reduced with a gluten-free diet.Recently, growing worry has formed that gluten can have detrimental health effects including heart disease, obesity, metabolic syndrome and neuropsychiatric symptoms, regardless of coeliac status.It is as a result of these concerns that the trend of gluten-free has become so popular.According to the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), the adoption of a gluten-free diet by non-coeliac sufferers has risen more than threefold from 0.52% of people to 1.69%, since 2009-10 to 2013-14.In 2013, 30% of US adults said they were trying to minimise, or cut out completely, their gluten intake, despite the much higher prices of gluten-free alternative foods.The study found that for mean daily estimated intake of gluten at baseline was 7.5g for women and 10g for men in the highest fifth and 2.6g for women and 3.3g for men in the lowest fifth.it was found that gluten intake correlated inversely with alcohol intake, smoking, total fat intake and unprocessed red meat intake.However, gluten intake correlated positively with whole grain intake and refined grain intake.Coronary heart disease was diagnosed for 6,529 participants, fatal myocardial infarction developed in 2,286 participants and non-fatal myocardial infarction developed in 4,243 participants.In the lowest fifth of gluten intake, coronary heart disease was measured at an incident rate of 352 per 100,000 person years, whereas in the highest fifth the incident rate was 277 per 100,000 person years.No significant association between estimated gluten intake and either fatal myocardial infarction or non-fatal myocardial infarction was found.The lack of association was the same for gluten intake and coronary heart disease risk, for both men and women.The study concluded that avoiding gluten had no effect on risk of coronary heart disease but did mean participants may be avoiding whole grains which have cardiovascular benefits.The US based researchers monitored just over 110,000 healthy participants with food questionnaires every four years from 1986 to 2010.Participants were excluded if they had diagnosis of myocardial infarction, angina, stroke or coronary artery bypass graft surgery, or cancer.Those with a diagnosis of coeliac were also excluded.The food questionnaires asked participants about their food items and portion sizes. The researchers then used the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health nutrient database to calculate the amount of gluten consumed.Any deaths occurring throughout the study were examined through hospital records and autopsy reports.As it was an observational study the researchers say no firm conclusions can be drawn about cause and effect.  However, the researchers did conclude that their study results “do not support the promotion of a gluten restricted diet with a goal of reducing coronary heart disease risk”.Source: The BMJPublished online ahead of print: doi.org/10.1136/bmj.j1892 “Long term gluten consumption in adults without celiac disease and risk of coronary heart disease: prospective cohort study”Authors : A.T. Chan, et al. 
Over half of food websites contain advertising specifically targeted to minors, a study has found, as health experts repeat calls for a ban on marketing practices that target children, both online and on television. Research carried out by the University of Hamburg has uncovered findings that identified over 60% of all websites for food contained elements designed to encourage children to consume foods high in fat, salt and sugar (HFSS).Of particular concern were the number of food companies, who were engaging in online marketing practices aimed at children after voluntarily committing themselves previously to an industry code of conduct.The study believed that the commitment made by these companies held no water in the online arena, with the researchers questioning their motivation as attracting younger consumers through marketing. They declined to highlight any examples."In order to deal with this problem, we need a ban on children's food, especially in the online area and TV," said department head for prevention at the AOK Federal Association, Dr Kai Kolpatzik.“The goal of the manufacturers is an active engagement with the content,” he continued. “Here, learning processes promote that.” “Children learn quickly and permanently. Eating habits are shaped during childhood and adolescence and have influence in adulthood. This makes the development of children marketing of particular concern.Figures provided by the research place Germany’s sugar consumption per person at 32 kilograms (kg) a year, or around 90 grams per day.The figures exceed those recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) which state sugar intake should not exceed 10% of an individual’s daily total energy supply. This equates to around 50 g of sugar for adults and for children no more than about 25 g per day. Dr Kolpatzik said that in most cases, these products, high in sugar, salt or fat, greatly increased the risk of childhood obesity.  In the expansion of children 's marketing in the online sector, social media sites such as Facebook play a special role. ©iStockMuch of the study’s disapproval was reserved for food companies’ use of social media. Here, it found children came into contact with online advertising that used celebrities, comics and on-line games a total of between eight and 22 times."Especially in the field of social media, the lure of confectionery manufacturers and similar suppliers has increased significantly," warned Dr. Tobias Effertz, director of studies and lecturer at the University of Hamburg."Children are becoming more exposed to advertising for unhealthy foods without their parents being able to effectively protect them."According to Dr Effertz, the “liking” and sharing ensured that children were more interactive with this type of media compared to something like TV advertising. He believed that companies benefited from a particularly strong multiplier effect."The direct recommendation and passing on of online content by friends usually produces a particularly high credibility," he explained.Dr Effertz’s comments broadly echo those found in recently-published guidelines produced by the WHO, which outlined new Europe-wide investigations into junk food ads aimed at children.Released at the end of March, the guidelines include a new protocol that advises member states on how to collect data on food marketing to children, in view of stricter and more coordinated measures against junk foods. The protocol marks the next step in action against advertising of HFSS foods. The hope is that by creating a unified research tool for governments and stakeholders, the root into exactly where and in what fashion HFSS foods are being marketed to children can be identified and addressed.Responding to the research finding's consumer organisation foodwatch identified Nestlé, Ferrero, and others as firms that would not stop volunteering 'sugar bombs' to children and shape their taste early.“With unhealthy food, the producers make the biggest profits. Instead of opting for voluntary agreements with the industry, Federal Food Minister Christian Schmidt must finally contain junk food advertising to children by law,” said foodwatch’s acting head of campaigns and research Oliver Huizinga.“As early as 2015, the World Health Organization has submitted a concrete nutrition model, according to which only balanced food should be advertised to children. The Federal Government must finally implement this model."“A ban on advertising alone is not enough, to reduce obesity in children” added Dr Kolpatzik.“Health literacy of parents and children be strengthened. Labelling of foods, for example, by the use of traffic light colours, has already been called for by the AOK some time ago at the EU level.”AOK’s project report on children's marketing for food on the Internet can be found here  (German only). 
The sweetener stevia is the hot topic of this year’s show following its approval as a novel food in the EU, according to the show organiser.Peter Grothues, vice president of Koelnmesse, the organisation behind Prosweets 2012 spoke to ConfectioneryNews.com on the second day of the fair in Cologne, Germany.He shares his highlights of the show so far and identifies what to look out for over the next few days. 
MEPs have rejected the revised nutrition claims list recently adopted by the European Commission, a move which could be detrimental for reformulation efforts in the food sector says a trade body.Brussels-based industry representative body, FoodDrinkEurope (FDE), said it strongly regrets the 'negative outcome' of the vote today in the European Parliament’s Environment, Public Health and Food Safety (ENVI) committee on the amended nutrition annex to the health claims Regulation. The proposal introduces two new nutrition claims into the Annex of EC Regulation 1924/2006 – namely, the ‘Now contains X% less’ claim as well as the ‘No added salt /sodium’ claim. A parliamentary communications spokesperson told FoodNavigator.com that 45 MEPs voted in favour of the objection to the Commission's proposals, while 15 vote against and three MEPs abstained.The food industry lobbyists are now urging members of parliament to vote in favour of the revised nutrition claims list when voting at plenary on Thursday, saying a negative vote at this stage would be “bad for consumers and for business”.“Food operators strongly support the use of nutrition claims ‘on pack’ to ensure that consumers are informed of a specific nutritional benefit or a nutritional improvement that has been made to a recipe (often via voluntary reformulation efforts),” said FoodDrinkEurope.The trade body argues that if today’s vote by the ENVI committee is confirmed in the EP plenary session on 2 February, consumers would thus not be informed of the benefits of incremental nutritional changes or improvements to products. As food operators would have less possibility to communicate their reformulation efforts, stressed the lobbyists, they would be discouraged to invest in costly R&D and innovation techniques for the European market. Misleading to consumers?At the ENVI debate yesterday, said the parliamentary communications spokersperson, MEPs spoke both in favour and against a veto of the Commission proposal but they were not divided along political group lines “as they often are on these kinds of debates.” He said there were differences of opinion within the political groups including the two biggest - European People’s Party (EPP) and the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists & Democrats in the European Parliament (S & D). Those wanting to veto the proposal said that allowing an additional label of "15% less sugar" for example could be misleading or confusing for consumers because of the other claims that are currently allowed - e.g. how would a consumer compare that to a "reduced sugar" label, which - under the rule - should refer to a much high reduction?Some MEPs argued that a high fat product could easily reduce fat content by 15% and still be a high fat, unhealthy product, while appearing to claim otherwise. Those in favour of the amendments to the nutrition annex of the health claims Regulation said that it could encourage the food industry to reduce salt, sugar, and fat content in their products step by step and that reformulating products more dramatically is not easy due to consumers being used to a certain product's taste. At present, the ‘Reduced in X’ claim permits food manufacturers to communicate about reductions in a nutrient compared with a range of foods in the same category over a period of time. FDE argues that the introduction of a ‘Now contains X% less’ claim would offer new possibilities to food manufacturers to communicate incremental nutritional changes made to their products to the consumer by comparing old and new recipes. “Technological constraints to rolling out these smaller, step-wise reformulations are important to consider in this lengthy and costly process, not to mention the importance of gradually familiarising consumers to the new ‘improved’ taste,” said the trade body. Commission backs incremental reformulation Frederic Vincent, the spokesperson for DG Sanco, the Health and Consumer Policy directorate at the European Commission, told this publication last week that an incremental approach to food and drink reformulation such as proposed under the new ‘now contains x% less’ claim is in line with the viewpoint of the EU platform for action on diet, physical activity and health.It also resonates, he added, with the Second WHO European Action Plan on Food and Nutrition Policy.Vincent said that modest reductions are more feasible and achievable by “more operators”. And, he argues “A wider range of reformulated products with such modest improvements but acceptable by more consumers could become available and therefore lead to a bigger impact in term of public health, compared with the 'light' products which are consumed by a limited [number of] consumers.”  
Cocoa podsA committee of MEPs is calling on the European Commission (EC) to consider legislating against use of child labour in cocoa plantations that fuel the EU's demand for chocolate, while the world's largest food firm Nestle has outlined its measures to safeguard against the problem.The European Parliament’s (EP’s) International Trade Committee (INTA) met last Thursday, and – while recommending that Parliament give consent to the International Cocoa Agreement (ICCO) 2010 in March – also adopted a resolution calling on the EC to legislate against use of child labour in the sector.The problem is particularly pronounced in West Africa, which produces 70% of the world’s cocoa and employs 7.5m people. However, cocoa seed extraction is very labour intensive, since the seeds can easily be damaged by mechanical cutting.INTA rapporteur, Vital Moreiera, said that during the consent procedure for the agreement “several stakeholders highlighted the issue of child labour in cocoa fields”.“Since we believed that this was a serious issue that could not be overlooked, we decided to raise the issue by means of a resolution,” he added. Child traffickingAccording to the International Labour Organisation, not all work done by children should be classified as child labour, but studies suggest that some individuals have been trafficked into working on cocoa farms in Ghana and the Ivory Coast.This resolution will also be put to a full vote at the EP in March, and while the committee said it acknowledged pressure on producers to keep labour costs down, it has called on cocoa traders, EU policy makers and consumers to address the problem of child labour collectively.Calling for a ‘holistic’ framework to ensure fair and sustainable trade, the MEPs called on the EC to consider legislation for the effective tracking of cocoa goods produced using child labour, and encourage International Cocoa Agreement stakeholders to ensure sustainability.An EP spokeswoman told BakeryAndSnacks.com that, as yet, there were no more concrete details from MEPs about potential measures that could be taken, while the EC itself had not yet responded to the committee's call for action.ICCO itself is a deal (drawn up by the United Nations) to regulate relations between the world’s leading cocoa producing and consuming countries, which in its latest (seventh) incarnation is designed to reinforce member cooperation, increase transparency and extend cooperation between the private sector and civil society.Nestlé addresses issueAsked for his reaction to the MEPs’ call for legislation, Nestlé deputy head of corporate media relations, Chris Hogg told BakeryAndSnacks.com that the firm did not own any commercial cocoa farms or plantations.He said: “Nestlé believes child labour has no place in our supply chain and we are firmly committed to actions to eradicate unacceptable practices in line with our commitments in the Nestlé Corporate Business Principles and the Nestlé Supplier Code.”To tackle non-compliance, Hogg said Nestlé had also partnered the Fair Labour Association (FLA) to investigate whether children were working on cocoa farms supplying its factories in West Africa.“Where they find evidence of child labour, the FLA will identify the root causes and advise Nestlé how to address them in ways that are sustainable and lasting. The results, which will be made public in spring 2012, will guide future Nestlé actions. We are the first food company to partner with the FLA.”These actions complemented Nestlé’s existing efforts – amongst other initiatives – to promote sustainability and better working practices in cocoa supply through the Nestlé Cocoa Plan, Hogg said.Backed by a CHF110m (€91.3m) investment, this plan addresses problems faced by cocoa farming communities from an economic, social and environmental perspective.  
The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) says it will continue to change and adapt to the risk assessment landscape as it celebrates 10 years of existence defined by, “transparency, scientific excellence, independence and responsiveness.”  “The world has changed since EFSA’s inception and EFSA is changing with it,” said executive director, Catherine Geslain-Lanéelle. “EFSA has re-structured internally both in support of its Science Strategy for 2012-2016 and to evolve with the risk assessment landscape that it has helped to define. These reforms will allow the Authority to be as flexible and reactive as possible to risk management needs while continuing to protect European consumers. EFSA will continue to shape the future of risk assessment through experience, flexibility and commitment, in particular to its core values of openness and transparency, scientific excellence, independence and responsiveness.” The agency noted it had grown from 3o staff in 202 to more than 450 at its Parma, Italy, base, and that it had, “evaluated more than 3,000 health claims, providing the scientific basis to protect European consumers from potentially misleading labelling and advertising of food products.” Other achievements included pooling more than 1500 scientific experts and published 2500 scientific outputs. Health and Consumer Policy Commissioner John Dalli said: "EFSA's credibility and scientific excellence is today being recognised on the world stage. Sound scientific data is crucial to good policy-making. EFSA has carried out important risk assessment work and I trust that it will build on its achievements of the last 10 years. Our vision is to continue ensuring that food has the highest standards of safety for our citizens." 
The role of on-pack health claims, images, information on how food is processed, health logos and nutritional labelling on the perceived healthiness of a food product has never been systematically evaluated but a new project, if funding is secured, could address that gap.Speaking to FoodNavigator.com this morning, Professor Klaus Grunert, of Aarhus University in Denmark, said that following on from the success of a nutritional labelling project that he led, his team is now seeking backing for a more detailed take on how consumers interact with every aspect of food packaging. Funding, confirmation of which is expected in the next two months, has been sought under the European Community's Seventh Framework Programme. The duration of the research project would typically be three years. “This interplay of all the information contained on a food pack and consumer decision-making around healthier dietary choices has never been studied in a comprehensive fashion,” explained Grunert, who was scientific advisor to the labelling research initiative, FLABEL that concluded today.One of the key findings of FLABEL, said the academic, was that a health logo such as the Dutch Choices trademark or the Swedish keyhole symbol can increase attention to, and use of, nutrition information on food labels, especially when the consumer is under time pressure. And this factor was critical in prompting the Danish researcher to seek funding for an additional assessment of the overall impact of these logos when combined with other data such as health claims and pictures, in tandem with nutrient data.The FLABEL research, which involved a consortium of academics, retailers and NGOs, shows the most promising option for increasing consumers’ attention to, and use of, nutrition information on food labels, is to provide information on key nutrients and energy on the front of the pack, in a reliable way. “We recommend that the industry uses a consistent list of nutrients, with the same font and the same colour scheme in the lower left hand corner of the front of the product, regardless of food or drink category. A shopping task we set consumers in leading retailers showed when this system was used in combination with a health logo across a broad range of products, consumers’ focus on the nutritional information increased by 300% over existing on-pack nutritional information formats.”And Grunert claims the research findings show that the long-standing argument over whether a system such as traffic light labelling is more effective than Guideline Dietary Allowances (GDA) at encouraging consumers to make healthier food choices is really rather redundant: “The use of colour coding can increase attention and use in certain situations, although the effects of both are not strong. Such formats such as GDA or traffic light labelling are not as important, we found, as lack of motivation, and this mindset is, unfortunately, not solved by nutritional labelling alone.” And the Danish researcher said that a key challenge for that research project and any additional EU-wide studies on food packaging’s influence on consumer shopping choices and policy developments to boost levels of nutritional intake across the block is the inconsistency in nutritional knowledge among consumers in the various member states. 
Flavour giant Givaudan is working with scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) to come up with a ‘flavour algorithm’ that could one day replace human taste testers.The project uses ‘genetic programming’ to put together algorithms that emulate the functions of the human nose. Working with MIT’s Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL), Givaudan flavour scientists will look to analyse taste-test results in a more accurate way, in the hope it may reveal more reliable indicators of consumer preferences. Using taste test data provided by Givaudan, a team of CSAIL researchers led by Una-May O’Reilly used a genetic programming tool to analyse and interpret the data. The method, which uses evolutionary computing involves different mathematical models ‘competing’ with each other to fit the available data. After this the best fitting models mix to produce models that are more accurate still.Professor Lee Spector, editor-in-chief of the journal Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines – where a research paper from the project appears – explained that “people have been playing with these [evolutionary] techniques for decades.”  “One of the reasons that they haven’t made a big splash until recently is that people haven’t really figured out, I think, where they can pay off big.”   Taste preference, Spector commented, “is a pretty brilliant area in which to apply the evolutionary methods — and it looks as though they’re working, also, so that’s exciting.”Flavour science The design of flavours and aromas in foods and drinks is big business, with leading flavour companies spending tens of millions of US dollars every year on research and development – including a lot of consumer testing.However, making sense of consumer taste-test results can be difficult – with taste preferences varying so widely that no clear consensus may emerge, whilst the nose itself can begin to loose sensitivity after testing around 40 samples.In order to avoid this problem, which often leaves flavour houses using incomplete and sometimes contradictory data, the new project aims to use an evolutionary algorithm to analyse patterns in current results and accurately predict future data. Taste mathematicsThe Swiss flavour giant provided CSAIL’s research team with data from 69 subjects who had evaluated 36 different combinations of seven basic flavours – assigning each a score according to its olfactory appeal. To help interpret the results O’Reilly and her colleagues used the computer programs randomly generate mathematical functions that predict scores according to the concentrations of different flavours. They explained that each function is assessed according to two criteria: accuracy and simplicity. “A function that, for example, predicts a subject’s preferences fairly accurately using a single factor — say, concentration of butter — could prove more useful than one that yields a slightly more accurate prediction but requires a complicated mathematical manipulation of all seven variables,” they explained.After all the possible functions (algorithms) have been assessed by the computer, those that gave poor predictions were removed, said the researchers. After this, the program takes parts of the surviving algorithms and randomly recombines them to produce “a new generation of functions”.  O’Reilly explained that the whole process is repeated about 30 times, until it reaches a point where the algorithms come together around a set of functions that match with the preferences of a single subject.The team said they have not yet been able to conduct studies to determine whether the new algorithms correctly predict testers’ responses to new flavour – but said a further computer model has suggested such tests will be successful.  Source: Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1007/s10710-011-9153-2 “Knowledge mining sensory evaluation data: genetic programming, statistical techniques, and swarm optimization”Authors: K. Veeramachaneni, E. Vladislavleva, U-M. O’Reilly 
All palm oil designated for the Belgian market will be produced based on the sustainability criteria of the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO) by 2015, claims a new pledge from the food sector in that country.The Belgian Alliance for Sustainable Palm Oil launched a charter to promote the use of certified sustainable palm oil in Belgium, which was signed by the main industry stakeholders from processors and product manufacturers to industry associations. They have committed to produce and source RSPO-certified sustainable palm oil and boost the transformation towards a fully sustainable market within that three-year timeframe.Darrel Webber, secretary general of RSPO said in response: “The Belgian Alliance demonstrates strong commitment and leadership in promoting sustainability among European product manufacturers, continuing the positive trend initiated by the Dutch national industry commitment in 2010. Today RSPO CSPO represents 11% of all palm oil produced globally. To this end, RSPO looks forward to working closely with the Belgian Alliance for Sustainable Palm Oil and its members to raise consumer awareness of sustainable palm oil.” Adam Harrison, VP of the RSPO and senior policy offficer for Food and Agriculture at WWF said the Belgian initiative demonstrates the importance of tackling sustainability through cooperation. He added: “WWF urges all companies using palm oil to set ambitious time bound targets for procuring certified sustainable palm oil, both in Belgium and in the other countries they are active, and begin buying it as soon as possible, so that we can realize our shared vision for a future where sustainable palm oil is the norm.”   
Premier Foods CEO Michael Clarke says he is pursuing a strategy of 'category blur' to revive the company’s disappointing trading performance, as he announces new marketing ammunition for the bakery and snack ‘power brands’ central to the approach.Discussing the strength of the firm’s brands, Clarke told The Telegraph yesterday that there was widespread “fondness” for them, and the firm had an opportunity to move from ‘fondness’ to ‘like’ to ‘love and can’t do without’.Premier unveiled a £50m (€60m) war chest this morning, that it said would double its marketing spend in 2012 in a bid to restore growth, targeting consumers with with its largest ever concentrated TV advertising push.CEO Michael Clarke said: “The awareness and popularity of our power brands remains strong, but it’s clear that we haven’t invested enough in marketing compared to our competitors. I’m committed to changing that.”These comments are a far cry from an investor seminar last May, when Premier showed City analysts a presentation including a slide entitled ‘Marketing on a Shoestring’, and extolled the free PR virtues benefits stemming from the fact that Victoria Beckham was a marmalade fan.Bakery and snack brands Ambrosia, Hovis, Mr Kipling are central to the new investment strategy, alongside Bisto, Oxo, Sharwoods and Loyd Grossman.Hovis stuck in bread ‘slugfest’, analystQuizzed as to whether the movement from “shoestring” to “major TV advertising push” across fewer categories was a wise policy, Investec analyst Martin Deboo told BakeryandSnacks.com: “It’s a general approach taken by most of the best-in-class consumer goods companies like Reckitt Benckiser, British American Tobacco, etc.”So it makes absolute sense, and particular sense for Premier because given they want to dispose of businesses and brands – having a view on where their destiny lies, it’s a sensible thing to do.”Panmure Gordon analyst Graham Jones told this publication: “Standing behind the main brands makes sense, but I don’t know how much of marketing spend is diverted from the tail of the business and how much is new money.“But clearly their [Premier's] previous strategy hasn’t worked. They haven’t had consistent enough innovation and marketing to sustain pricing power with the retailers.”But did Premier have sufficient fire power to make a splash in marketing terms and boost brands such as Hovis, given stiff competition in the bakery segment with large players such as Warburtons and Kingsmill (Allied Bakeries, Associated British Food)?Deboo said: “They have the firepower as they’re one of the three major players, so can afford a decent marketing spend. The problem is for Hovis and the UK bread category is that it’s a terrible industry.“It’s a power brand for Premier, because I suspect it’s an acknowledgement of the fact that no-one else would buy it from them – in objective terms it’s very hard to see how they can have a profitable future in bread. “There’s too much capacity in the industry, Warburton’s is the differentiated player with superior product quality, and we believe greater cost efficiencies, etc.,” Deboo added.January 2012 statistics from Mintel support Deboo's comments, with the research firm noting that "Warburtons appears untouchable as the UK's biggest pre-packed bread brand [within a £1.93bn sector] accounting for three in every ten pounds spent in the sector. However, sales have faltered for the Bolton bakery over 2011."However, Mintel reported flat sales for Hovis in 2011 (due to its temporary Tesco delisting last year) with a 23% market share, while Kingsmill saw growth that pushed its segment share up to 23%.Deboo added: "So it’s a slugfest for the number two position between Hovis and Kingsmill – and the former is more than a match in terms of quality, but the problem is that ABF is a diversified group without any of the financial problems of Premier, with deep pockets. So they can tolerate periods of low profitability much better than Premier can.”Let kids eat cake, not chocolate…Speaking to The Telegraph, Clarke also discussed the potential benefits of “category blur”, with one example with potential in this direction given in the interview a Mr Kipling Fruit Salad Mini-Battenberg cake.Category blur aims to leverage brand strength by gaining sales across new consumption channels; examples of successful products in this respect include Premier’s own brand Branston (which moved into baked beans in 2005) and Cadbury’s trifles and mousses.Clarke said: “Imagine if you had these on the shelf instead of a chocolate bar? You’d probably choose this for your son over a chocolate bar…and imagine the margin.”So did Deboo see promise in this strategy? “It’s difficult to say and it depends on the exact product. Cakes into confectionery is seen as quite a challenge, given the appeal of confectionery and the marketing intensity of it. 'Category blur' in principle I don’t have a problem with – but that particular one may be difficult,” he said.Asked the same question, Jones said: “By confectionery I assume they mean single-serve cakes sold aside Mars bars, things like that. There is mileage in that – but whether it will transform the overall performance remains to be seen.“Obviously, the bulk of the cake category seems to be bogged-down in constant aggressive promotional activity. But it seems a sensible thing to try, although I don’t know how successful it will be.”June 2011 statistics from Mintel reveal that the wrapped cakes and cake bars market has struggled to maintain momentum since 2009, with consumers turning away from ambient cakes to unwrapped cakes and other snacking categories.According to the research firm: "Small/individual cakes and cake bars are continuing to dominate the market in terms of sales, although the segment has seen a drop in growth owing to a decline in pre-packed cakes and slices." 
Rampant acquisitionist Naturex will make 3-4 European and North American acquisitions in 2012, once it completes a deal with an unnamed Asian supplier by the end of March, CEO, president and founder, Jacques Dikansky has told this publication.The world’s biggest botanical extracts supplier has made much of its ambition to boost its presence and sales in developing regions like Asia, the Middle East, Africa and Latin America, but Dikansky confirmed expansion in North America and Europe remained key to the company’s seemingly endless drive to expand – and rapidly.“We expect the Asian deal to close by the end of March, and after Asia our other specific targets will be European and North American,”he said, acknowledging that slower demand in the traditional markets did not necessarily mean that production could not go on in them.“Of the few deals we expect to close, some are in the food area, some are more nutritional such as botanical extracts.”The Asian acquisition will not add to the company’s portfolio but give it boosted production capacity in natural ingredients in the region that grew faster than any other at 16.7% to reach €28.56m in 2011, compared to €92.5m for the Americas (up 10%) and a 10.3% gain in Europe to €51.7m.Its overall 2011 results, announced last week showed growth of 12.3% €253.6m. “We see very good opportunities in Asia, eastern Europe, latin America,” he said, noting China, Thailand, Brazil, Mexico and Russia as zones of particular interest. “If North America and Europe slow, they will be compensated by the emerging markets. We think 2012 will be a special year where we will be very busy with acquisitions.”Latin AmericaHe said the company was actively seeking acquisition targets in latin America to further boost local production capacities after it gained a facility when it paid €110m for Spanish player, Natraceutical in 2009.The Natraceutical plant was being expanded to develop, “colour production capacity” by April this year. Extracts will come on line in 2013.Dikansky also relayed that the cosmetics area that represents just €3m in revenue, would represent an increasing “percentage of business over the years”.Dikansky said the €16m acquisition of fellow French supplier, Burgundy, “had been difficult one due to their financial situation” but the that the integration had been rapid (“done in three months”).Naturex has locations in 18 countries. 
Honey producers and importers in the EU and elsewhere face legal and economic uncertainty arising out last autumn’s European Court of Justice’s (ECJ) ruling, claims a legal expert calling for an amendment of the Regulation to exclude honey.Writing in the journal European Food and Feed Law Review, Tobias Teufer, a lawyer with German firm Krohn Rechtsanwälte, said the ruling has potentially severe consequences for the marketing of honey in the EU in terms of new testing and labelling costs.Teufer argues that the ECJ ruling goes against the spirit and purposed of the original legislation covering GMOs in food with the European legislator having purposefully excluded several scenarios from the application of the Regulation in order to make it work in practice.September 2011 saw the ECJ, the highest court in the bloc, decree under a modification of Regulation (EC) No. 1829/2003 that honey containing traces of pollen from genetically modified (GM) plants must receive prior authorisation before it can be sold as food in the EU.Prior to the ECJ’s decision, foodstuffs containing honey were not required to declare the presence of pollen on their labels. The ruling means that honey should not contain pollen from GM sources, unless the pollen has the appropriate authorisation for food use in the EU. If the pollen is from an approved GM source and if the total pollen content exceeds the 0.9% threshold allowed for adventitious presence, it should also be labelled accordingly. According to the ECJ’s current jurisdiction, any presence of traces of pollen from GM crops triggers the application of Regulation (EC) No. 1829/2003 with its authorization and labelling requirements. “In practice, beekeepers and businesess trading honey all over the world must commission thousands of expensive laboratory analyses in order to determine whether they can lawfully market their honey in the EU. And because of the inhomogeneous character of honey they doe not even know whether they can rely on the results of these analyses,” writes Teufer.But the legal specialist argues that the ECJ’s ruling is based on a false factual foundation and that its judges ruled erroneously due to not being correctly informed about the production and harvesting of honey. Teufer claims that pollen is not “used” in the production of honey, contrary to what the Court concluded, and thus cannot be classified an ingredient - the basis for the ECJ’s amendment of the legislation.“Pollen is already present in the nectar which is stored and worked upon by the bees in the honey-combs of the beehive,” he writes.This opens up the opportunity for national courts contest the regulation, said Teufer, while the general labelling provisions under the new Food Information Regulation (FIR), he added, would also allow for the referral of the interpretation of the ingredient definition of pollen to the ECJ.“What is needed is a workable interpretation of the current law and in the longer run amendments to the legal provisions concerned,” stressed Tuefer Source: European Food and Feed Law Review (EFFL) Volume 6 Number 6 2011 Title: GMO-Regulation (EC) No. 1829/2003 and Honey: How to ProceedAuthor: Tobias Teufer 
Improving R&D to utilise the wealth of information known on flavours and target markets before developing or launching a new product can help industry better understand their chances of success, say researchers.The message is simple; companies need to do more homework if they are to more accurately judge the success rate of new product launches. Writing in the journal Food Quality and Preference , the authors argue that whilst predicting the market success of a new product prior to a launch is difficult, by collecting as much information as possible prior to launch, industry can begin to make better predictions. “The process of collecting this information is not easy, and it requires patience and considerable communication between researchers and departments with the needed information ... However, based on this case study coordinating analysis of such knowledge may be able to guide future projects to successful fruition,” said the researchers, led by Professor Edgar Chambers IV of the Sensory Analysis Centre at Kansas State University, USA.Chambers IV and his colleagues explained that such information includes collecting data even before the product is developed – for example whether the flavour is new to the overall category, of if it is a ‘trendy’ flavour in other areas.“For flavoured snack products (using only limited general information available to the product developers) success rates of approximately 70% could be predicted,” revealed the team. They explained that for the snack product category: “being a completely new flavour for the market generally predicted failure, but being traditional, trendy, or a flavour commonly found in restaurants within a country often predicted success.” Study detailsThe new study aimed to determine whether the success of a new line extension for a multi-flavoured snack product (available internationally) could be predicted from information available before launch. Using data from 15, data for each product – including information related to authenticity, familiarity, current trends, packaging, and market issues – the research team devised a protocol that was able to identify with reasonable accuracy how successful the product was to be,Using 63 flavours, the team correctly identified 75.8% successful products as successful and 66.7% unsuccessful products as unsuccessful. “For this flavored snack product, being a new flavour in the market was a negative predictor and being traditional, trendy, or a flavour available in restaurants was positive in terms of predicting success,” they confirmed. Source: Food Quality and Preference Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1016/j.foodqual.2012.01.005 “Predicting success for new flavors with information known pre-launch: a flavored snack food case study”Authors: A.R. Doan, E. Chambers IV  
Major food players DSM and Unilever, dairy manufacturer FrieslandCampina and beverage giant Heineken form part of the Dutch Sustainable Growth Coalition (DSGC) set up to drive and promote sustainable growth in industry.The alliance is facilitated by Ernst & Young and has the support of the Dutch Employers Federation VNO-NCW. The DSGC has identified a challenging environment whereby companies need to create innovative solutions to adjust to a burgeoning population, increased production and consumption, scarce resources and climate change. It is focused on sharing values and strategies among international and local business communities, governments, consumers, investors as well as Universities and NGO’s. The alliance has also pledged to stimulate debates and policy recommendations connected to sustainable business growth.  
European agents seize hundreds of tonnes of fraudulent food in December 2011 Criminality, the global supply chain and the unpredictable nature of food adulteration for financial gain mean it can pose a greater public health risk than traditional safety threats such as pathogen contamination, according to new research.The study – Defining the public health threat of Food Fraud, by John Spink and Douglas C Moyer - notes that current intervention systems are not designed to look for the “near infinite number of potential contaminants” that are at food adulterant crooks’ disposal. They add there is a lack of understanding about the associated public health food risk.“Economically-motivated adulteration may be just that – economically motivated – but the food related public health risks are often more risky than traditional food safety threats because the contaminants are unconventional,” said the researchers.The paper, published in the Journal of Food Science, defines food fraud as an intentional act for economic gain while a food safety incident is an unintentional act with unintentional harm.The study seeks to provide a base reference document on the issue by outlining a food risk matrix and identifying food fraud types.Global supply chainThe US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) defines economically motivated adulteration (EMA) as “..the fraudulent, intentional substitution or addition of a substance in a product for the purpose of increasing the apparent value of the product or reducing the cost of its production”.The scientists said that this food fraud risk has been heightened and its impact extended by the globalization of the supply chain.“While the scope of food fraud may have remained the same over time, modern food supply chains and manufacturing infrastructures have vastly extended its scale and potential impact,” they added.Traditional food safety intervention focuses on a set list of known harmful chemicals known as ‘bad bugs’. But the research points out fraudsters can use adulterants not on this register.It cites that prior to the Chinese melamine scandal in 2008, where hundreds of thousands were sickened and six died after powdered milk was adulterated with the chemical, the substance was not even on the radar of the authorities.Prevention versus intervention Evolving risks and a lack of a definition – until recently – have held back progress in combating food fraud, said the authorsIt identifies three main types food fraud risks; direct risk , where an imminent danger exists; indirect risk, where the hazard comes from longer term exposure; and technical risk - non-material issues such as documentation which deliberately misrepresents content or country of origin information.Efforts to tackle food adulteration currently centre on intervention measures that swing into action after the problem has been discovered. This has to change and move towards a preventative approach which involves a deepening understanding of how it differs from other food concerns, said the research.To do this a food matrix has been developed – which seeks to assess the cause of the risk and the fraudsters’ motivation in four disciplines; food quality, food fraud, food safety and food defence (i.e.: against terrorism).CriminologyBecause the issue involves criminal intent, the authors stress the need to employ theories in the criminology field. Using traditional theories can focus on cutting this type of crime by understanding the motivation behind the behavior, while environmental analysis seeks to tackle it by reducing physical attributes such as time and space available to the perpetrators.Unlike traditional food safety incidents, which can be predicted by using statistical techniques, food fraud and adulteration is by its nature more random and opportunistic – making it harder to plan against. The criminality and intelligence of fraudsters also makes detection more difficult.First stepsUsing the US as its template, the research points out that while laws and their enforcement are key, the overlapping jurisdictions of various federal and state bodies makes this more complicated, fragmented and challenging.By outlining the problems and understanding the nature of the risks are “the first steps in transitioning through the natural evolution of intervention and response to prevention”, said the authors. 
Food manufacturers have backed the government’s new plan to boost UK food and drink exports to emerging markets such as India and China, which aims to help towards the drive for 20% industry growth by 2020.Food firms embraced the news following agriculture minister Jim Paice’s announcement today (January 27) of the formation of the new Farming, Food and Drinks Export Action Plan, designed to support the industry’s trade with high growth economies.The plan will support companies by offering access to a wide range of advice at ministerial and ambassadorial level. Another key theme is to advertise the financial safeguards to protect smaller firms from not being paid.Shared ambitionFood and Drink Federation (FDF) director general, Melanie Leech said: “Food and drink is one of the UK's key growth sectors and our shared ambition with government is to grow the sector by 20% by 2020 across both the domestic market and exports.“The core of food and drink manufacturing is small to medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and it can be difficult for these companies to access the help and support that they need to take that first step to export. Therefore the opportunity to work in partnership with the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) and UK Trade and Investment (UKTI) has been embraced by industry.”Leech praised the plan for containing “many common-sense actions that can be taken forward in a relatively short timescale to deliver results as well as those initiatives that are more complex and longer term”.The FDF will review the plan’s progress after a year and hoped it would make a “significant contribution” to what has already been a record year of exports for the industry.Food and drink exports were valued at £10.8bn in 2010 and are expected to reach almost £12bn when official 2011 figures are released in March, according to Leech.Paice said that there were “huge opportunities” for British firms wanting to tap into emerging markets, due because of the surging world population and a demand for western products.Economic recovery“I’m convinced the sector can become an engine for growth for our economic recovery,” he said.“It’s crucial we get the right support to business at home as well as championing British products abroad.”The plan has been developed by DEFRA, along with UKTI, industry trade associations and top exporting companies. A forum for the plan was co-chaired by Paice and Nestlé UK chairman, Paul Grimwood.Grimwood said: “Thousands of UK food companies, large and small, can grow their business by exploring export opportunities. The government-backed export plan will champion open markets and the removal of trade barriers. It will also provide SMEs with the support and confidence they need.”The Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board (AHDB) has also welcomed the plan, describing it as “vital” in terms of improving international competitiveness.Chief executive Tom Taylor said: “Faced with the challenges of less support through the Common Agricultural Policy in the future, UK agriculture needs all the tools in the box to secure its competitiveness. Where export markets offer potentially better returns for products that have low demand in the UK, we should be taking full advantage of them.” 
Importers of food and drink to European countries that impose a ‘sin’ or ‘fat’ tax should pay close attention to how it impacts the market, according to one expert specialising in EU food law.In countries such as France, which recently imposed a levy on sugar-sweetened beverages, the taxes appear to be “origin neutral”. However, food lawyer Ignacio Carreño from the law firm FratiniVergano in Brussels, said: “It should be closely analysed whether there is, in practice, a higher tax burden on imported products subject to these taxes.”He also suggests that third country governments and producers, “must monitor these legislative actions closely and assess the impact that they may have on their products, market access opportunities and conditions of competition”.Carreño’s comments on ‘sin taxes’ were made in this month’s issue of the FratiniVergano publication, “Trade Perspectives”.Hungary, Denmark and Finland have all introduced so called ‘sin’ or ‘fat’ taxes on food and drinks thought to be linked with poor health and obesity. Belgium, Ireland, Romania and Sweden are said to be actively considering a levy but industry is weighted against it. The pan-European food industry body, Food and Drink Europe, has opposed fat taxes as “discriminatory”.Meanwhile, the Danish Butchers Association (DSM) recently mounted a legal challenge against the Danish government. DSM claims that the tax levied on foods containing more than 2.3 per cent saturated fat, distorts competition between small and large businesses and violates the Lisbon Treaty. Also that it creates inequality between domestic and imported products. Carreño outlines that the obligation to pay the French tax, set at €0,072 EUR per litre or approximately 0,024 EUR for a 33cl can, is incumbent upon manufacturers of these drinks established in France and on importers. So it also applies to imported products. He believes that from an EU perspective, the ‘sin taxes’ of France, Denmark and Hungary “appear to be indirect internal taxes that are not harmonised in the EU”. He states: “In general, EU Member States may introduce and maintain non-harmonised internal taxes and freely establish their modalities.”However he adds that such taxes must comply with the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. In particular Article 110, which prohibits internal discriminatory taxation, directly or indirectly, on products of other Member States, in excess of that imposed directly or indirectly on similar domestic products. Carreño also anticipates that the implementation of such taxes may result in discrimination against third country products, drawing attention to Article III:2 of the GATT. This prevents WTO Members from applying to imported products internal taxes in excess of those applied to domestic products so as to afford protection to domestic production. He writes: “The French tax appears to be origin-neutral, but instances of discrimination relevant to France’s WTO obligations may nevertheless occur where the tax de facto favours domestic production of like or ‘directly competitive or substitutable’ products.”Carreño declined to be interviewed by FoodNavigator.com.Source: http://www.fratinivergano.eu/Trade%20perspectives%202012/Issue%20No.%201%20%2813-1%29.pdf 
A pre-pregnancy diet that is high in animal fat and cholesterol could almost double the risk of pregnancy related diabetes, says new research.The study – published in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition – reports that women who consume a diet high in animal fat and cholesterol before pregnancy may be at higher risk for gestational diabetes than women whose diets were lower in animal fat and cholesterol. The researchers, from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Harvard University, found that women in the highest group for animal fat intake had almost double the risk for gestational diabetes compared to women with the lowest intake. They also observed that women in the highest group for cholesterol consumption were 45% more likely to develop the condition than those in the lowest groupWomen whose diets were high in total fat or other kinds of fats – but not in animal fat or cholesterol – did not have an increased risk, explained the authors."Our findings indicate that women who reduce the proportion of animal fat and cholesterol in their diets before pregnancy may lower their risk for gestational diabetes during pregnancy," said senior author Cuilin Zhang of the NIH.Research detailsThe researcher team used data from more than 13,000 women participating in the Nurses' Health Study II to investigate possibly links between pre-pregnancy diet and incidence of gestational diabetes."This is the largest study to date of the effects of a pre-pregnancy diet on gestational diabetes," explained Dr. Katherine Bowers of Harvard University, the first author of the paper.Bowers and her colleagues calculated the amount of animal fat in participants' diets as a percentage of total calories and divided participants into five groups, or quintiles, based on those percentages. Then the researchers compared the risk for developing gestational diabetes for each group. They found that women in the highest quintile of animal fat intake had almost double the risk for gestational diabetes compared to women in the lowest quintile, whilst those in the highest quintile for cholesterol consumption were 45% more likely to develop gestational diabetes than those in the lowest. No significant associations were found between gestational diabetes incidence and dietary polyunsaturated fat, monounsaturated fat, or trans fat intakes, said the research team."Additional research may lead to increased understanding of how a mother's diet before and during pregnancy influences her metabolism during pregnancy, which may have important implications for the baby's health at birth and later in life,” said Bowers. Source: American Journal of Clinical Nutrition  Volume 95, Number 2, Pages 446-453, doi: 10.3945/​ajcn.111.026294 “A prospective study of prepregnancy dietary fat intake and risk of gestational diabetes”Authors: K. Bowers, D.K. Tobias, E. Yeung, F.B. Hu, C. Zhang  
The involvement of the private sector in child nutrition has proved contentious at a recent meeting of the World Health Organisation’s executive board (EB).The WHO is developing a comprehensive implementation plan on maternal, infant and young child nutrition, which it sees as “a critical component” of a global multi-sectoral nutrition framework.The draft was debated at the EB 130th session and among the main issues was the level of private sector involvement and food marketing, according to the group Global Health Watch (GHW).In a summary of the discussions relating to nutrition, GHW concluded that “major concerns remain on the role of the private sector and the need to keep such actions at a community level”.It said that the Papua New Guinea delegate “deplored the use of private public partnerships to push interventions saying that market based goods tend to have higher concentration of unhealthy substances”.Meanwhile Estonia, on behalf of the EU, highlighted the need to include private sector effort. The People’s Health Movement also submitted comments to the EB about the draft, saying a “warning should be included about food and beverage industry involvement”.It adds: “Corporate‐sponsored nutrition education materials present an even more complex problem than straightforward advertising because they blur the boundaries between marketing and education.”TargetsThe WHO’s Maternal, Infant and Young Child Nutrition draft comprehensive implementation plan lists global targets, one of which is for “no increase in childhood overweight by 2022”. It also has a list of actions that should be jointly implemented by Member States and international partners. Among them is “to stimulate development policies and programmes outside the health sector that recognize and include nutrition”, such as involving agriculture and food processing, among others.Regarding food manufacture, it states that “the nutrient profile, including better micronutrient content and reduced content of salt, sugar and saturated and trans-fatty acids, needs to be improved”.Similarly, it highlights the importance of trade measures, taxes and subsidies as a way of guaranteeing access and enabling healthy dietary choices.These, it says “can be powerful tools when associated with adequate information for consumers through nutrition labelling and responsible food marketing, and with social marketing and promotion of healthy diets and healthy lifestyles.”A WHO spokesman told FoodNavigator.com that the EB was “overall satisfied” with the plan and “some suggestions were given on intersectoral approaches, prioritisation of interventions and handling potential conflicts of interest”.The EB has now asked the Secretariat for more information on the targets proposed in the action plan and there will be a web based consultation on this subject. The spokesman added that this would lead to a revision of the draft plan for final discussion at the 65th World health Assembly, from 21 to 26 May. 
With 2011 sales jumping 12.3%, the world’s biggest botanical extracts specialist says it will acquire 4-5 companies in 2012, with negotiations advancing with an Asian target.Founder and CEO Jacques Dikansky said in press reports that 4-5 acquisitions were likely in 2012 to go with the 10 it took possession of in the past decade, including French supplier Burgundy and Polish player Pektowin in the past three months. Its biggest acquisition was the €110m deal with Spanish firm Natraceutical which doubled its revenue in 2009.Delivering its 2011 financials today, Naturex saw 2011 exchange rate-adjusted sales surge 12.3% to €253.6m, from €226.3 in 2010.“We are very satisfied with this excellent year of growth, marked by the positive orientation of all of our activities and geographic zones. The integration of Burgundy is now on the road to completion and our teams are working actively to quickly develop the commercial synergies.” Dikansky said.“With our strengthened geographic positioning, the highly favourable acceptance of our new product ranges and our industrial and scientific expertise, we are confident in our ability to continue to outperform the future growth of our markets.”Q4 sales were the lowest for the year at €62.4m – 12% up on 2010.Burgundy contributed €2.7m to sales, including €2.3m in the Nutrition & Health division and €0.4m in Personal Care.Sales were broken down between Food & Beverage (€153.4m – up 11.9%); Nutrition & Health (€84.5m – up 11.9%); Personal Care (€3m - up 11%).In unadjusted figures, sales in Asia and Oceania grew the fastest at 16.7% to reach €28.56m, compared to €92.5m for the Americas (up 10%) and a 10.3% gain in Europe to €129.78m. The company noted three new offices in 2011 meant it had locations in 18 countries. 
The food industry should look to new dietary guidelines and EU health legislation as an opportunity to develop a wide range of new and innovative products, say researchers.The review – published in Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety – provides an overview of opportunities for new product development and nutrition research in the light of the Food-Based Dietary Guidelines of the World Health Organization (WHO) and European Union (EU) legislation on health claims. Led by Professor Sedef Nehir El of Ege University, Turkey, the authors said that the new legislation and guidelines will “play an important role in regulating information to the public about a wholesome diet and for improving the availability and affordability of nutritious food choices to consumers.”“As a result, food science and technology are prompted to create a new framework for these food-based dietary guidelines, principally in the areas of food physics, methods of food storage and preservation, nutrient restoration and fortification of foods, and the development of health-focused designer foods and functional foods,” said Professor El and her colleagues. “Food manufacturers have the responsibility to supply the widest range of products in accordance with the principles of dietary guidelines,” they argued.Consumer demandsThe researchers explained that an increasingly important determinant in food choice is the growing consumer concern about nutrition and health. “This focusing of consumer interest on the food supply, and also extensive research and technological developments in food science will provide further opportunities for new product development,” wrote the team.El and her team said the food industry can be “a significant player in promoting wholesome diets, physical activity, and new product development in line with dietary guidelines.”Innovation potentialMany say that the only hope for business survival is the ability to continue innovating. El suggested that in the past, the criteria for screening a new product idea have mainly related to marketing factors – arguing that this approach has to change in the future.“The manufacturer must not only know the technology of combining ingredients to produce an attractive, palatable, and safe food, but also, in the current regulatory climate, give serious consideration to the formulation of the existing and recommended dietary guidelines,” warned the team. “In this regard, it is apparent that changes that influence the development of healthy products will come thick and fast in the next few years,” they said.The Turkish research group noted that many new initiatives have been undertaken by the food industry: to reduce the levels of saturated fats, trans-fatty acids, sugars, and salt in processed foods, promote reasonable portion sizes, and increase the introduction of innovative, prudent, and nutritious choices. Industry can continue to contribute to meeting the guidelines, whilst creating opportunities for innovation and new products by reducing the number of energy-dense products; and improving the nutrient profile of processed food through the reduction of salt, added sugar, trans-fatty acid, and saturated fat content, said El and her team.  Source: Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety Volume 11, Issue 1,  pages 2–12, doi: 10.1111/j.1541-4337.2011.00167.x “Food Technological Applications for Optimal Nutrition: An Overview of Opportunities for the Food Industry”Authors: S. N. El, S. Simsek 
A selection of Britvic brandsFragile fiscal confidence amongst consumers in Great Britain (GB) and Ireland means they are turning away from Britvic’s stills to its lower-priced carbonates, according to an analyst who follows the firm.Panmure Gordon analyst, Damien McNeela, made his comments in a note following Britvic’s first quarter (Q1) results yesterday, which revealed that the soft drinks giant (the UK’s largest supplier of still soft drinks, and the number two player in carbonates) saw revenues rise 2.5% to £295m (€352m).Britvic CEO, Paul Moody, said the company would continue to compete “strongly and effectively” in each of its markets. He said: “We expect the general economic and trading environments to remain challenging, but…are confident in our ability to deliver another solid set of results for the year ahead, in line with expectations.”Strong showing from PepsiStrong performance in GB carbonated soft drinks and in France (with revenues up 5.8% and 12.1% respectively to £120.8m and £54.5m) fuelled this growth, with GB sales led by Pepsi (produced and sold by Britvic under licence in GB and Ireland), which gained a 2% market share in take-home cola.“However, the ongoing weak consumer environment resulted in further deteriorations in GB stills and Ireland, where revenues declined by 1.7% and 10% respectively,” said McNeela. Britvic itself glossed the former figure by noting that stills, “showed an improving performance compared to recent quarterly trends”.But the flipside of good growth in GB carbs (volume sales also up 5.6%) was that consumers “continue to switch out of higher-priced stills” where revenues fell, McNeela said, a factor that, he added, probably meant a negative mix effect for Britvic’s GB margins.Moreover, Ireland remained a difficult consumer market for Britvic, with sales down 10% to £37.8m, although the firm retained its market share. Britvic’s board glossed the situation thus: “Half of the 10% revenue decline is attributable to third-party brands, largely alcohol, which we distribute via the licensed wholesale business where the on-to-off trade shift was especially market.”Commenting on the firm’s impressive French performance, McNeela said: “France delivered a strong performance with sales up 12%, driven by strong pricing [with price increases pushed through to counter input inflation] but encouragingly has managed to grow both volume and value share within the syrups market.”Sluggish international growthElsewhere, Britvic International saw lacklustre 1.7% sales growth for Q1 (41.5%: Q1 2011), but Britvic said this reflected the timing of international concentrate shipments to Australia – compared to a stock build last year, and reaffirmed its overall 20% international revenue growth guidance for 2012.In a pre-closing update prior to its full-year results release on March 2012, Britvic rival A.G Barr predicted a like-for-like sales increase of 12% for 2012, fuelled by growth in Irn-Bru, Rubicon and KA – and said it would continue to develop plan to invest in production capacity in the south of the UK.In its July 2011 interim report, A.G Barr (2011 turnover: £222.4m) said that to meet long-term growth ambitions it anticipated investing in a new site with canning and additional PET capacity, to come on stream over the course of 2012/13. Discussing today’s update, McNeela said: “Consumers continue to be value-focused and as such the company benefited from the expansion in distribution of its [cheaper] Barr brand across the UK, as well as promoting Irn-Bru at low price points.“Exotic brands Rubicon and KA continued to deliver double-digit growth, benefiting from increased promotion in the impulse channel.” But despite the firm’s report of strong trading on a “buoyant total soft drinks market”, McNeela said Panmure saw better share value in Britvic or Nichols, since comparatively A.G Barr’s shares were trading at an approximate 20% premium to these rivals on an Enterprise Value/EBITDA basis. 
Princes is to become part-owner of its first tomato processing plant in a move expected to bring closer links with growers and suppliers.The food and drink group and its Italian tomato supply partner, AR Industrie Alimentari SpA (ARIA), have created a new company to include the acquisition of ARIA’s tomato processing factory in Foggia, Italy. The factory produces ambient tomatoes and other Italian products. The new company, Princes Industrie Alimentari SrL (PIA), will be majority owned (51 per cent) by Princes, whereas previously it had a small shareholding in the Aria business.Princes stated: “The investment significantly enhances Princes’ scale internationally and provides access to new customers and markets. “It also supports the further growth of the Napolina business by giving Princes a more direct relationship with its supply partners in Italy.”Princes is a wholly owned subsidiary of Mitsubishi Corporation. It manufactures, imports and distributes branded and customer own brand products. The Napolina brand includes pasta and Italian pasta sauce. New European customersTraditionally Princes has mainly been a UK food manufacturing business, with a number of UK production sites. It’s also claimed to be the third largest drinks supplier in the UK.However, a spokesman for Princes, which has its headquarters in the UK, told FoodNavigator.com that this latest investment allows the company to “expand their food production into Europe and gets them access to new European customers and market”.He added: “As a group, Princes is very keen to acquire companies. The last two acquisitions were significant food manufacturing sites.”He also described them as both resulting in an increased relationship with producers.In July last year Princes acquired two major UK canning sites in East Anglia in order to grow its business in the UK and continental Europe and they apparently use a large amount of produce from the region.Princes’ new company includes the Italian factory, which has been in operation since 2009, and some of the supply agreements. Products produced at the 120,000 square metre processing site are for retail, food service and the food manufacturing sector.It claims the business is expected to generate annual sales exceeding €200 million and process around 400,000 tonnes of fresh tomatoes annually.Ken Critchley, managing director of Princes, said: “This is a significant development for our group and an important step in our strategy for further international growth. PIA creates new partnerships for our business and broadens our access to new customers and markets. The company will continue to support the agricultural community in Italy by developing strong relationships with local growers and suppliers.”The transfer of ARIA’s assets into the new PIA company is expected to take place within the next few months, subject to regulatory approval.  
UK-based confectionery and snacks firm Zetar has established a French subsidiary to leverage its position in continental Europe.The announcement was made in the company’s half-year results where it saw modest growth in its confectionery category and a sales decline in its natural snacks division.Zetar manufactures children's character chocolate products and branded alcohol-based chocolates under the Bailey's and Famous Grouse brands. It also produces natural fruit and nut snacks and is a major Easter egg supplier.French subsidiaryThe company said in its financial statement: “Over recent years, the Board has reviewed a number of acquisition opportunities before concluding that establishing our own subsidiary was the most cost effective and lowest risk method of entry to the European market.”“We believe that this is an exciting opportunity to leverage the Group’s UK business into another large European market,” it said.This month, the company set-up Zetar France SAS, a wholly-owned French sales, marketing and distribution subsidiary based in Lille, Northern France.“The establishment of French and Belgian distribution capability has already provided the Group with credibility as a European operation and has helped Kinnerton to extend the UK licences for Hello Kitty, Power Rangers and The Simpsons to include France, Benelux and other European markets.”It added that it would seek to add licences specific to the French and Belgian markets to its portfolio and said there may be plans to include additional branded and private label confectionery and snacks ranges.PerformanceFor the first six months ended 31 October 2011, Zetar’s group revenues rose 2.4% to £61.8m.Its adjusted profit before tax stood at £2.8m, up 13% on the same period last year.The company also reduced its net debt by around £1m to £24.4m.ConfectioneryThe firm’s confectionery division saw a 12.4% sales increase during the period with a £1.4m boost from its Derwent Lynton business, which it acquired in April last year.The company’s Bailey’s range also saw 10% growth, while Zetar said the re-packaging of its Lir brand had also furthered sales.The company closed Derwent Lynton’s Derby factory just before the end of the period. It has integrated operations to its facility in York and said it expected to realise cost benefits from the move in the second half of the financial year. SnacksZetar’s natural snacks division did not perform so promisingly.Operating margins were said to be well below historic norms due to a prolonged period of raw material cost inflation.Sales for this segment declined 13% to £20.6m.Easter outlookThe company said its strategy for the confectionery division would be to capitalise on seasonal sales.It enjoyed a reasonable Christmas despite a fall in consumer confidence, but expects the next holiday season to be more difficult than the last.Company chief executive Ian Blackburn said: “While the outlook for Easter remains less than certain than usual, due to the pronounced fall in consumer confidence, we remain positive about the strategic direction of our business.” 
DSM BioSolutions has seen increased demand for its outsourcing services from the food industry, with a growing number of larger companies realising the benefits.The Netherlands-based company offers services targeted at the food ingredients, nutraceutical, pharma and industrial markets, partnering its customers in process development and manufacturing.The business unit came online in 2009 and services range from developing and optimizing microbial strains and fermentation protocols to large-scale contract manufacturing.Since then Marco Oomen, global marketing and sales director, DSM BioSolutions, told FoodNavigator.com: “We see a clear demand increase from the food and nutraceutical industries in particular to work with outsourcing partners. “Outsourcing to an experienced partner such as DSM helps to quickly deliver a product to market.”He added: “A key benefit of outsourcing is that it helps to keep a tight control of costs.”The company’s portfolio supports the development of food enzymes, peptides, metabolites, biocatalysts and polyunsaturated fatty acids, as well as flavours and fragrances.Typically small and medium-sized food companies do not have access to a sufficient infrastructure for their ingredient and product development and have been more likely to outsource. However, Oomen said that for large manufacturing companies, working with an outsourcing partner “provides a manufacturing source for their key ingredients while reducing their business and supply risk”.He added: “Using the services of an outsourcing partner allows them to focus on their core competences, leaving the microbial fermentation process development and infrastructure to an experienced, reliable and sustainable company such as DSM.”Cost conscious Oomen said that optimizing microbial strains and fermentation protocols, which determine the conditions under which the micro-organisms produce the target product, are both ways of helping keep costs down. With regard to fermentation protocols, there are many variables influencing the process, such as temperature, oxygen level, feeding strategy, mixing speed and substrate choice. DSM claims that it maximizes the output of a fermentor, ultimately leading to a lower cost of goods.Similarly, Oomen said: “In order to have a low cost of goods, it is vital to have a microbial strain with high production levels, producing minimal impurities and delivering predictable behaviour in a large fermentation vessel.”In a highly competitive market such as the food industry, speed-to-market is also key.DSM BioSolutions claims that one way it addresses this is through its PlugBug platform technology, which offers a range of high producing, stable and scaleable micro-organisms. Oomen said: “We typically scale up from the 10 litre lab-scale to 35,000 litre industrial scale in one single step. This really reduces the timeframe from the laboratory to large scale manufacturing.”Meanwhile customers retain full ownership of the product and the related IP. Quality control Critics have argued that outsourcing production can increase the vulnerability of the food supply.DSM underlines the importance of avoiding reputation-threatening contamination and cross-contamination with its Quality for Life seal of excellence, for quality, reliability, traceability and sustainability. 
The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), in its newly released scientific strategy 2012-2016, said it has put in place a comprehensive system to record and evaluate the declared interests of scientific experts and to manage any conflicts of interest. But the agency's strategy states that “in new fields where expertise may be scarce and mostly in the hands of the organisations that have a commercial interest in developing the new technology, expertise which is viewed to be independent of these interests may not be readily available. “At the same time, in order not hinder technological innovation it is crucial that EFSA has appropriate access to the necessary expertise to avoid lagging behind in its scientific excellence.” When asked for clarity on this point, a spokesperson for the EU risk assessor told this publication that it it means "even in areas where independent scientific expertise may be scarce, EFSA will always ensure the independence of its scientific advice through the implementation of its Declarations of Interests policy, which is one of the strictest of its kind in operation."The Parma-based agency said, however, that policy around how to demonstrate how data provided to EFSA are used and managed, as well as the mechanisms by which an opinion is developed and scientific consensus is reached, still needs to be further developed. To maintain and build trust further, the food safety body said it is continuing to find ways to build meaningful dialogue with consumers and other stakeholders in order to understand and address their risk perceptions and information needs and preferences, particularly related to new or complex scientific issues. “EFSA will also continue to perform public consultations on scientific opinions, particularly when preparing guidance documents, and by doing so collect views from various stakeholders, risk managers and risk assessors, including the global scientific community.”Transparency question marks EFSA's scientific rigour has been under review of late.In December, the EU Ombudsman found that Parma-based agency failed to ensure transparency in how it carried out its duties.The watchdog agreed with German not-for-profit group-Testbiotech's complaint that EFSA did not observe the relevant procedural rules and did not carry out a sufficiently thorough assessment of the potential conflict of interests arising from the move of a former member of its staff to a biotechnology company.At the time EFSA said it has strengthened its procedures related to staff leaving the agency, “building on the experience gained in the past”.“EFSA has adopted rules which bind all EFSA staff leaving the Authority to behave with integrity and discretion as regards the acceptance of certain appointments and benefits.”And last week saw an MEP question the validity of EFSA's review of aspartame following what she claims was support from the agency’s scientists for a statement backing the safety of the sweetener despite the fact that the agency's assessment is not due until September this year.A spokesperson for the agency told this publication that the scientists in question, Professor Silano and Professor John Larsen (former chair of EFSA’s Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources added to Food – ANS), were invited to the conference as “independent experts”. The spokesperson added: “Professor Vittorio Silano, chair of EFSA’s Scientific Committee, reaffirms any definitive statement on the safety of aspartame at this time is premature pending EFSA’s full re-evaluation."  
Premier Foods’ £30M Brookes Avana deal with food group 2 Sisters is unlikely to result in complications with the competition authorities, according to city analysts.Experts have said that they do not foresee the deal being referred to the Competition Commission (CC), despite Tuesday’s (January 23) announcement that the Office of Fair Trading (OFT) had invited views from a variety of stakeholders to comment on the recent acquisition.The OFT confirmed that it would listen to written representations on “any competition or public interest” issues relating to the deal.Competition authoritiesJulian Wild, food group director at law firm Rollits, told FoodManufacture.co.uk: “I would be surprised if the competition authorities want to look at the Brookes Avana deal as it is entirely private label. In the past they have tended to take the view that the major retailers are big and strong enough to deal with this type of deal.“I think it is more likely that any issues relating to this deal would have been stirred up by the competition, rather than the consumer.”Jeff Stent, analyst at Exane BNP Paribas agreed. He told FoodManufacture.co.uk that he did not believe the size of the deal was significant enough in the market to attract the attention of the authorities.“A major customer of Brookes Avana is Marks & Spencer, which is also a customer of 2 Sisters,” he added.“I think if you take a market view then there is not going to be much of an issue. But M&S may have a different view, although I would imagine it would have been sounded out as early as possible.“In the overall market it is not that big, so any competition issues are unlikely.”AcquisitionThe deal was first announced on December 8 last year with analysts describing it as a “win-win deal”. Experts have now confirmed that the acquisition had been completed and that Premier had “received the cheque”.One unnamed analyst told FoodManufacture.co.uk that the OFT’s decision did not mean that the deal would definitely escape attention from the competition authorities and that there was still “some risk”.Any issues that arise from the deal, would be “2 Sisters’ problem alone”, the analyst confirmed. But it was understood that Brookes Avana would be kept separate from the rest of the 2 Sisters business.Wild added: “It is not impossible for the competition authorities to divest a deal after it has been completed. And generally these things are taken into account before the deal is completed. In this case time wasn’t on 2 Sisters’ side as they were keen to push the deal through.”He cited the example of Kerry Group’s acquisition of Headland Foods last year as an example of a deal being referred after completion. Kerry’s acquisition of Headland was referred to the Competition Commission after strong concerns were lodged with the OFT. It described the two firms as “by far” the largest suppliers of frozen ready meals to UK retailers. 
The overall global market for organic food and drink is in good shape but dairy sales in the sector fell during the recession, due to high 2008 milk prices in particular, according to Euromonitor International.In a videocast for the firm, health and wellness research analyst Diana Cowland said the wider organic category had been “fairly resistant to the global recession”.In world terms, the organic market increased in value to US $27bn (€20.8bn) in 2010, up from $20bn in 2006 (the latter figure excluding inflation), but still comprised only 5% of total ‘health and wellness’ retail sales, Cowland said.The sector posted double-digit sales growth from 2006-2008, she explained, but the onset of the world recession and the relative expense of organics led to a drop in growth, although it remained positive from 2006 to 2010.Cowland said this fall was due to the particular effect of the recession on the two main markets comprising 90% of global organic sales, Western Europe and the US.Resilience across all categories?Organic food and beverages combined enjoyed a compound annual growth (CAGR) of 5% from 2006-2010, excluding inflation, she said, compared to packaged foods on 2% and hot and soft drinks on 3% growth.“So is this resilience true for all organic food and beverage categories?” Cowland asked rhetorically. Unfortunately not for dairy, where all other packaged food (90% all organic sales) categories fared well.The two largest categories – organic dairy and bakery – witnessed combined sales of $11bn in 2010, Cowland said.“[But] while all other organic food categories saw growth during the recession, organic dairy sales fell due to two main reasons: high 2008 milk prices in the US,” she said.Somewhat controversially, Cowland lumped soy milk in with organic dairy, and added: “Secondly, Dean Foods, one of the largest organic players, repositioned organic [soy] milk brand Silk as a non-organic product. As a result organic dairy sales fell by 18% in 2009.” *‘Tremendous’ coffee growthOn the organic beverage side, performance had been good, Cowland said, with strong growth mainly due to a large increase in organic coffee sales in Canada, the US, Germany and France, which together comprised two thirds of sector sales.The reasons for this? “Globally there was much greater consumption of coffee, while people are becoming much more aware of the environmental production methods,” Cowland said.Secondly, there was also tremendous growth in emerging markets such as the Asia Pacific and particularly Latin America, she added.Soft drinks performed 2% drop in growth since 2008 for two main reasons. Poor sales of Dr. Oetker’s Bionade brand were due to the German firm’s prices hikes in 2008, she said, while Ocean Spray had repositioned its cranberry juice as non-organic product.Babies go organic…Since the onset of the global recession, one organic product was a standout success, Cowland said. “Organic baby food has fared particularly well, as despite lower disposable income levels, parents are willing to spend money on their children to ensure they have high quality and safe produce.“Especially since there have been recent health scares such as the melamine contamination of milk formula in China.”Last September, Nicholas Saphir, chairman of the UK’s largest organic milk supplier’s co-operative, OMSCO, warned that improved organic performance in liquid milk was the key to future organic dairy prosperity, as he predicted a 2.5% fall in UK organic demand in 2011.Saphir said this was due to aggressive retail promotions of conventional milk, a squeeze on organic ranges and space, and greater competition from conventional products offering premium standards, which he said the organic sector needed to tackle via innovation.Moreover, increasing margins for non-organic dairy farmers meant the organic farm gate premium was under pressure, OMSCO said, with UK supplies expected to fall 3.4% in 2011, with organic farm expansion undercut by farmers reverting to conventional production.* Euromonitor told DairyReporter.com that it had included Dean Foods' Silk brand in this analysis for "dataset purposes", since as a B2B company its clients were often interested in related data on dairy substitutes as well as dairy products. 
Consumption of food fried in olive or sunflower oil is not linked to heart disease or premature death, according to new research published in the British Medical Journal (BMJ).The BMJ study revealed that the consumption of fried foods in Spain – a country where olive or sunflower oil is used for frying – was not associated with incidence of coronary heart disease or with all cause mortality. However the research team, led by Professor Pilar Guallar-Castillón from Autonomous University of Madrid, warned that their findings only apply to frying in olive oil and sunflower oil – adding that their results would probably not be the same in other countries where solid and re-used oils were used for frying.“In a Mediterranean country where olive and sunflower oils are the most commonly used fats for frying, and where large amounts of fried foods are consumed both at and away from home, no association was observed between fried food consumption and the risk of coronary heart disease or death,” said Guallar-Castillón and his team.Frying - the risk?In many Western countries, frying is one of the most common methods of cooking foods. The authors noted that the consumption of fried food has been associated with some cardiovascular risk factors, including high blood pressure (hypertension), obesity, and low levels of high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. While consumption of fried food can increase some of these heart disease risk factors, a definitive association between fried food and heart disease has not been fully investigated, said Guallar-Castillón and his team.Writing in an accompanying BMJ editorial (doi:10.1136/bmj.d8274 ), Professor Michael Leitzmann from the University of Regensburg, Germany, said the study results expose the myth that “frying food is generally bad for the heart.” However he stressed that the results do not mean “frequent meals of fish and chips will have no health consequences.”"The study suggests that specific aspects of frying food are relevant, such as the oil used, together with other aspects of the diet," he added.The British Heart Foundation echoed the view of Leitzmann, noting that the study also used a typical Mediterranean diet, rather than a Northern European diet, and as such may not be true of such a diet.Study detailsThe team surveyed the cooking methods of 40,757 adults over an 11-year period, using data from the Spanish arm of the EPIC study. None of the participants had heart disease when the study began, explained the authors.Trained interviewers asked all the participants about diet and cooking methods. The participants’ diet was then divided into ranges of fried food consumption, the first quartile related to the lowest amount of fried food consumed and the fourth indicated the highest amount.For definite coronary heart disease events, no association with fried food consumption, revealed the authors, adding that their results did not vary between those who used olive oil for frying and those who used sunflower oil. “Likewise, no association was observed between fried food consumption and all cause mortality,” confirmed Guallar-Castillón and his team.Commenting on the study Leitzmann said the findings “suggests that specific aspects of frying food are relevant, such as the oil used, together with other aspects of the diet.”He argued that future research should focus on characterising fried foods in more detail, “by including information on the type of oil used for frying, the type of frying procedure performed (deep fried or pan fried), the time and temperature used for frying, and the degree to which oils are reused.” “Such improvements in dietary assessment should help disentangle the myths from the facts when evaluating the potential effects of fried foods on human nutrition and health,” said Leitzmann. Source: BMJ Published online ahead of print, Volume 344, doi: 10.1136/bmj.e363 “Consumption of fried foods and risk of coronary heart disease: Spanish cohort of the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition study”Authors: P. Guallar-Castillón,F. Rodríguez-Artalejo,E. Lopez-Garcia, L.M. León-Muñoz, P. Amiano, et al 
DuPont benefited from last year’s acquisition of Danish specialty food ingredient company Danisco in the fourth quarter of 2011, as revenue more than doubled in its nutrition and health business – although the chemical group’s overall profit fell slightly.The company said that lower demand for solar panels and digital television parts, as well as lower demand from Asia in particular, hit its net profit in the fourth quarter to December 31, down 0.8% from $376m to $373m. Net sales were up 14% in the quarter, to $8.4bn, although volumes fell 10%.Sales in the nutrition and health segment hit $806m during Q4, with $468m of that from the acquisition of Danisco, the company said.DuPont chair and CEO Ellen Kullman said in a statement: “We delivered exceptional full-year results in 2011 despite significant market headwinds late in the year. Our market-driven science continues to meet customer needs in food, energy and protection. Acquisitions in Nutrition & Health and Industrial Biosciences, coupled with robust and disciplined productivity efforts across our businesses, contributed to our successful performance.”The company’s agriculture unit reported the only volume increase during the quarter, of 3%, while revenue was up 8%. DuPont said the increase was mainly due to strong sales in Latin America.For the full year, the company earned about $3.5bn, compared with $3.05bn in 2010.The company did not revise its 2012 earnings forecast of $4.20 to $4.40 a share, an increase of 7-12% on 2011. DuPont has successfully completed its bid for Danisco in May, 2011 in a deal that valued the Danish company at about $6.5bn, up from an initial offer equivalent to about $6.3bn.  
Stepwise fat, salt and sugar reduction may be more successful than a drastic decrease that would not meet consumers’ expectations in terms of taste, claims DG Sanco. FoodNavigator.com reported yesterday  on claims from Brussels lobbyists, BEUC, that the proposed amendment to the health claims regulation annex on nutrition claims to allow ‘now contains x% less’ fat/sugar/salt, etc (where x must be at least 15%) will only serve to mislead and confuse the public.In a follow-up article, we hear further from Frederic Vincent, the spokesperson for DG Sanco, the Health and Consumer Policy directorate at the European Commission.He told this publication that an incremental approach to food and drink reformulation such as proposed under the new ‘now contains x% less’ claim is in line with the one of the EU platform for action on diet, physical activity and health as well as the Second WHO European Action Plan on Food and Nutrition Policy.In October, the Commission's regulatory committee backed the additions to the annex and the measures now face European Parliament and EU Council scrutiny. But the consumer advocates BEUC say: “Claims such as “reduced fat” or “light in sugars” compare a product’s composition with that of other foods in a category. The claim “now X% less” compares a food…with its previous recipe. Consumers might be tempted to buy a product which they believe is healthier, whereas this is actually not the case.Even after 15% reduction, many foods would still have a high fat, sugars and/or salt content. Small reductions are easy to achieve for manufacturers, and “now X% less” claims are likely to pop up all over the market, including on unhealthy foods.”But Vincent said that modest reductions are more feasible and achievable by “more operators”. And, he argues “A wider range of reformulated products with such modest improvements but acceptable by more consumers could become available and therefore lead to a bigger impact in term of public health, compared with the 'light' products which are consumed by a limited [number of] consumers.” Vincent notes that the EU’s High Level Group on Nutrition and Physical Activity has developed a common EU framework for salt reduction and fixed a realistic benchmark for overall salt reduction of a minimum of 16% over 4 years. “A 15% reduction can be therefore very significant,” he added.  In case of sugars reduction, the conditions of use for the claim 'now contains X less' but also for the claim 'light' ensure that sugars will not be replaced by fat and lead to a higher energy of the reformulated product. “Replacing sugars by other carbohydrates, even if it does not decrease the energy, is recognised as beneficial by nutritionists as it lowers added sugars consumption,” said the spokesperson for DG Sanco. 
Ingredients firm CSM has acquired UK bakery firm Cookie Man for an undisclosed fee as it looks to make gains in in-store and out-of-home bakery.The deal includes Cookie Man’s equipment and factory in Esher, Surrey.The firm fell into administration last week and made 25 employees redundant, but was saved after administrators ReSolve Partners LLP found a buyer in CSM.Developed in-store marketEva Linder, director of corporate communications at CSM, told BakeryAndSnacks.com that the transaction was in keeping with the company’s strategy “We have seen a shift between the bakery shops in the streets to in-store and out-of-home bakery,” she said.In-store bakery refers to bakeries within supermarkets while out-of home bakeries are those in the catering sector. According to Linder, though in-store and out-of-home is a trend throughout Europe, the UK market is more developed. “The UK market is a step ahead of the European market,” she said, adding that the Cookie Man acquisition would support CSM’s position in this area.UK operationsCSM already has similar operations in the UK. It also owns Sussex-based business Kate’s Cakes and has its own operations in the UK market with bread, doughnut, cake and muffin lines at its production facilities in Wirral, Manchester and Bradford.Linder said that CSM also has a presence in in-store and out-of-home in continental Europe.She indicated that the company saw future opportunities for growth in these markets in Europe, including through further acquisitions.Cookie ManCookie Man’s product range includes cup, fairy and loaf cakes, mini-bites, cake slices, muffins and cookiesThe firm has 340 employees, which will be integrated into CSM.Cookie Man experienced 44% slump in its gross profit in 2010 compared to the previous year, from £4.2m (€5m) to £2.4m (€2.8m).After taxation, this translated as a £437,591 (€522 669) loss, following profit of just over £300,000 (€358 327) in the previous year. 
European consumers group, BEUC, claims the proposed “now 15% less” nutrition claim on foods, which is set to be debated by MEPs next week, is confusing and misleading for consumers.Claims such ‘now with 15% less fat’ are currently not on the Health Claims Regulation's annex of permitted nutrition claims. But a working document tabled last year by the EC on the revision of the annex of permitted nutrition claims included recommendations for a reformulation claim ‘now contains x% less’ fat/sugar/salt, etc (where x must be at least 15%, to be permitted for one year following the launch of the reformulated product). In October the Commission's regulatory committee backed the additions to the nutrition annex and the measures now face European Parliament and EU Council scrutiny. The Parliament’s Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Committee (ENVI) is set to debate the objection to the 'now contains X% less’ claim on Monday next and vote on it the following day. The food sector argues that reducing calories and/or specific nutrients by 30% is difficult and that allowing food makers to advertise smaller reductions - as small as 15% - at least for a limited period of time (one year) would encourage them to reformulate their products. Just a marketing tool, claims consumer groupHowever, Brussels-based consumer advocates, the BEUC, said it supports food reformulation but: “We expect it to be driven first and foremost by public health reasons and not ( just) used as a marketing tool.”The group added that it will be difficult to restrict the use of claim “now X% less” to one year only: “Less scrupulous operators might be tempted to stop their efforts after a minor recipe change. We are also concerned that the claim “X% less” will mislead consumers.”The consumer lobbyists said that ‘reduced”, “light in”, “low”…are some examples of the many nutrition claims EU food manufacturers can already use to communicate about their products’ nutritional composition. “For most consumers, who are not aware of what these claims exactly mean in terms of nutrients contents, comparing products to make healthy choices can be a real challenge. The new “X% less” nutrition claim will only add to their confusion,” added the organisation.Clearer communication A spokesperson for the pan-European food and drink industry trade body, FoodDrinkEurope (FDE), told FoodNavigator.com that the vast majority of FDE's members support the proposed claim because it is "key to communicating" changes made to products to consumers. "Communication by means of such claims provides food operators with an incentive to further invest in R&D, technology and innovation. As a result, members hope the Parliament will vote against the objection on 31 January,” said the FDE spokesperson. The spokesperson for the FDE said its members support nutrition claims which ensure the consumer is informed of a specific nutritional benefit or that a nutritional improvement has been made to a recipe. “This was acknowledged by the member states and the Commission when they agreed to the proposal now before the Parliament,” said the FDE representative.Commission view Indeed, Frederic Vincent, a spokesperson for DG Sanco, the Health and Consumer Policy directorate at the European Commission, agrees. He told this publication that the: "Now contains X % less (energy, fat, saturated fat, sodium/salt and/or sugars)" is not a misleading claim. “It provides factual information on the new content in a nutrient or energy in a reformulated product,” he added.Vincent said that to ensure consumers have all the information they need to appreciate the reformulation, products bearing such claims should clearly state the level of the nutrient or energy prior to reformulation, allowing the comparison in absolute amount with the current level indicated by nutrition labelling."Article 9 provisions on comparative claims apply when the comparison is made between products on the market and ensure a fair comparison. The new claim "now contains X% less" is information on the new recipe of a given product. The reference product is not anymore on the market and there is no choice between the old and the new recipe," he explained.Vincent said that the one year time limit is proposed to stimulate step by step improvements. "It is estimated as the time needed to introduce a new recipe on the market and to get it known by the consumers," said the Commission's spokesperson. Step wise approach to reformulation The nutrition claim “reduced in X” currently enables food manufacturers to communicate about reductions compared to a range of foods of the same category, said the FDE.However, continued the food industry representative, manufacturers would also like to be able to communicate to consumers on smaller, incremental reformulations easy to control by comparing the old and new recipes. “A step-wise approach to reformulation is often necessary from a technological standpoint and to accommodate gradual change in consumer taste. In this regard, it must be noted that difficulties remain for manufacturers reformulating their products,” she explained. The spokesperson added: “It would be clear for the consumer that the ‘now contains X% less” claim is made vis-à-vis the previous recipe because the Commission proposal stipulated that the level of the reduced nutrient before reformulation would need to be clear on pack. We believe that this ensures the consumer will not be misled.”Barbara Gallani, the Food and Drink Federation's director of food safety & science, echoes those sentiments: “We strongly support the addition of the X% less claim to the nutrition annex. We don't agree that it is confusing for consumers. It would allow some companies to make incremental reductions of certain nutrients, whilst at the same time communicating these changes to consumers.” 
Removing and 'recycling' solid proteins from waste waters could boost productivity whilet protecting the environment, say the researchers. Recycling protein from that is usually discarded in surimi processing water could provide an additional source of fish protein ingredients for the food industry, say researchers.The study – published in the Journal of Food Quality – investigated methods to recover ‘lost’ fish protein from waste waters that are usually discarded. The research team, led by Professor Jesse Stine from the USDA’s Subarctic Agricultural Research Unit, revealed that it is solids from surimi wash-water could be successfully recovered using a pilot unit containing a membrane ultrafiltration system that concentrated protein from the surimi wash-water.“It was demonstrated that the recoverable material is nutritionally similar to the final surimi product and that the overall yield can be increased using membrane technology,” explained Stine and colleagues.“The recovered wash-water protein could be used to obtain a fish protein ingredient or added back at a low percentage to surimi products,” they said.The team explained that using such a method to effectively recover proteins from waste water “would not only reduce the negative environmental impact and the cost of waste disposal, but could also lead to new ways to generate profit.”“Recovered protein could be returned to the process to increase final surimi yield,” they suggested.Surimi processingSurimi is made up of concentrated protein that has been obtained from extensively washed fish flesh. As an ingredient, surimi and fish proteins are used in a variety of products. The authors noted that many surimi products “have become increasingly popular due to their unique textural properties, storage properties and high nutritional value.”As part of the surimi manufacturing process, minced fish flesh is repeatedly washed with chilled water to remove non essential proteins, lipids, and other water soluble materials – leaving a tasteless and odorless pure protein product.However, the researchers noted that surimi wash-water from this process typically contains between 0.5–2.3% protein.They suggested that “new and different technologies are needed to recover these proteins economically.” In order to increase productivity and improve utilization of seafood resources, the argued that processors and manufacturers should looking at alternative technologies to recover proteins and other material from the waste water. Research detailsThe new study aimed to evaluate the potential of membrane filtration technology for the recovery of protein from surimi wash-water by recovering and characterising the properties of recoverable waste solids.Stine and co-workers revealed that solids from surimi wash-water “were successfully recovered using an ultrafiltration system.”They revealed that protein concentrates recovered in the trial “had a significantly higher moisture and lipid content when compared with surimi,” and had a higher number of lower molar mass proteins than surimi. “From the results of this study, it is possible that the recovered wash-water protein could be used to obtain a fish protein ingredient or added back at a low percentage to surimi products,” said the team  Source: Journal of Food Quality Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1111/j.1745-4557.2011.00424.x “Recovery and utilization of protein derived from surimi wash-water” Authors: J.J. Stine, L. Pedersen, S. Smiley, P.J. Bechtel 
Japanese ingredients giant Ajinomoto has begun construction work on a 2bn yen (US$26m) expansion of its flavor seasoning plant in Brazil.The project, announced by the firm’s Brazilian subsidiary Ajinomoto do Brasil, comes hot on the heels of the firm’s investment in a new instant noodle plant in north east Brazil.Brazil is a key market for Ajinomoto, second only to Asia, said the firm, which said its Tempero Sazón flavor seasonings retail brand has grown from strength to strength since its launch in 1988, with sales volumes growing on average 7% a year from fiscal 2007 to 2010.Growing its overseas consumer foods business is a key part of its 2011-2013 business plan, said the company, which is best known for making the sweetener aspartame.Flavor seasonings are blends of spices, salt, sugar, umami seasonings and other ingredients with extracts of meat, fish or vegetables for use in soups, stir-fried dishes and pre-seasoning.  
Mafia involvement in the Italian food industry is rife, with revenue from the agriculture and food sector generating 5.6% of the entire organised crime business in the country, finds a new parliamentary report.The study, prepared by the Italian parliamentary commission of inquiry and released at the end of last week, concludes that the food sector is worth €12.5bn to criminal groups, who are undercutting prices paid to producers, and boosting trade in counterfeit Italian foodstuffs. The report was informed by hearings over a 12 month period from prominent food industry stakeholders such as the directors of the buffalo mozzarella and balsamic vinegar trade associations. The parliamentary inquiry, which concluded that organized crime has entered into every aspect of food supply chain from production to transport to supermarkets, also heard from the national anti-Mafia prosecutor, Dr Pietro Grasso and, Sergio Marini, the president of Italy’s biggest farmers’ group, Coldiretti. Price control Coldiretti claims the safety and perceived standard of Italian food is “at risk” due to products such as olive oil and cheese being "passed off" as being of Italian orgin and branded 'made in Italy', but in fact obtained with cheaper, imported raw materials often of dubious quality.The agricultural organisation claims farmers’ incomes are being hit and Italian consumers are being overcharged due to the fact that these criminal groups are dictating producer and retail prices. “The prices of fruit from field to table even triple due to the infiltration of the underworld in the transport business,” said Coldiretti, in an emailed statement to FoodNavigator.com. And Mafia investigator Grasso is calling for legislation to be amended to ensure organised crime’s control on the Italian agri-food industry is curtailed. The parliamentary report calls for greater collaboration among international authorities to control trade in counterfeit goods and also urges more training of all the national bodies involved to hinder the manufacture of fradulent goods as well as co-operation between the Italian civil and criminal court system in this regard. In 2008, the European Anti Fraud Office (OLAF) found that a number of Italian companies had been manufacturing industrial butter using animal fats and synthetic materials to then be sold on to member states.  
SIG Combibloc says the runaway Chinese success of its drinksplus technology is ‘going global’, with top food firms impressed by its premium beverage applications.Leading filler SIG first launched the technology last year in tandem with China’s two leading dairy groups, Inner Mongolia Mengniu Dairy and Inner Mongolia Yili.The firms produced, respectively, UHT milk drinks with nata de coco (‘cream of coconut’) and rice grains, and SIG said the products had established a new beverage category in China.Asked why SIG Combibloc chose to introduce drinksplus in China, a spokeswoman told BeverageDaily.com: "In China, the added-value of fruit and vegetable in food products is very well received and has a long tradition, for example fruit and jelly bits in desserts."She added: "When presenting the drinksplus concept to customers in the beverage industry, we received enormous interest in the system concept in the US and Europe as well. Further trendy beverage creations are already poised to launch on the market in the near future."Modification kitThe system allows fruit and vegetable pieces, coconut flakes, nuts and cereal grains to be added to aseptic cartons, using standard SIG filling machines for liquid dairy and non-carbonated soft drinks (NCSD).The technology can process individual particulates of up to 6mm in length and width, and comprises a ‘drinksplus kit’ with valves, shafts and fill nozzles, “tailored to provide an optimal flow when filling innovative drinks containing particulates”.SIG Combibloc told BeverageDaily.com that it had three technical processing options for implementing the drinksplus concept using its standard machines:Benefits for beverage manufacturers in adopting the technology were several, according to SIG.Firstly, the drinksplus system allowed them to break into a completely new market segment for products in aseptic cartons, enabling supplementation of existing brand portfolios with added-value products, the company said.“Combining top quality drinks with added extras underscores the premium nature of the products, and fits perfectly with one of the key current trends in the beverage market,” it added.Unusual taste experiencesCustomers wanted both healthy food and interesting and unusual taste experiences, according to SIG, with fruit pieces, vegetables and grains seen as both healthy and added-value extras.“In addition, drinks containing nutritious particles have a special consistency and provide new, unusual drinking experiences,” the firm added.Beyond China, Danone-Unimilk in Russia has launched two whey drinks with fruit under the ‘Actual’ brand, in 25cl cartons (pictured) and targeted at young active women wanting a ‘healthy snack’, but also desire “new and indulgent taste experiences”.Premium juice maker Tipco in Thailand had also launched ‘FruitPlus’ in 25cl cartons, SIG said, which included mandarin orange juice with real pulp and sacs, and fruit and vegetable juices with aloe vera pieces.Similar launches have also taken place in Iran and Saudi Arabia, and SIG said it had collaborated with ingredients producers to create its own new juice concepts.These include an apple and plum juice with aloe vera bits, a yogurt drink with cereal grains and apple pieces, and a chocolate drink with coconut flakes. 
Picture Copyright: Vika‘Convenience’ is the watchword within cheese ingredients for Dutch firm Vika Food Ingredients, with the company focusing its R&D efforts on products with this benefit, having just signed a new co-operative partnership with A-ware Food Group.The terms of the deal will see A-ware – also based in The Netherlands, and describing itself as a food- storage, transport, slicing and packaging specialist – develop, market and sell cheese specialties for international retail clients. Vika, which turns over around €100m, will supply cheese and other dairy ingredients to industrial customers in the food manufacturing, foodservice and retail sectors.These include grated cheese, cheese powder, processed cheese and cheese replacers; non-dairy products range from stocks in past and powder form to seasonings, fruit and vegetable extracts and dry and wet marinades.Vika MD, Mel Tunderman, told DairyReporter.com that the company was already a success on the world stage in the supply of cheese and other dairy ingredients. He said: “We are already present on the international stage, but this co-operation allows us the possibility to enter the retail market in Belgium and Scandinavia, where A-ware is already active, and where we can use our knowledge to develop products for them, to also enter that market.”Asked which products within Vika’s dairy portfolio were selling well, and which products had real potential, he added: “What we see is that convenience is getting more and more popular, and we’re making ingredients for convenience products. “So when you look at our portfolio, we are specialising in selling ingredients to the ready meal market, and as an ingredients in snacks. So convenience is very popular at the moment, and we’re developing ingredients especially for that field,” said Tunderman.A privately owned company with its main production facility in Ede, Holland, Vika ripens, cuts and packages cheese specialties, and also stores and distributes cheese and other food products.The company also has sites in Holland, Belgium, Italy, England and New ZealandJan Anker, CEO, A-ware Food Group, said: “Last year we incorporated Schipper Cheese, a company specialised in melting and smoking cheese. The product and concepts developed together with Vika Food Ingredients are an addition to the present assortment.” 
Tight supply and high prices in guar gum are set to continue until at least the end of 2012, and probably beyond, claims a leading hydrocolloid industry analyst.A recent IMR International report published by consultant, Dennis Seisun, notes the situation on guar gum remains critical for food buyers, with oilfield service companies getting priority from suppliers. “Food buyers have been quoted prices around US$10/kg and even then volumes are not available to fulfil all requirements,” reports Seisun, who files a quarterly update on developments in the hydrocolloid sector. He added that there is no indication of any replacement for guar in the hydraulic fracking sector. And Seisun predicts that “unless there is a shift in technology from the oilfield industry there is no end in sight for the current guar shortage.”In fact, stressed the hydrocolloid expert, in the case of many hydrocolloids such as guar or gelatin, the days of buyers being in the driver's seat are over. “Suppliers are recouping investment costs and recovering from extended periods of minimal price increases,” he said. And Seisun notes that second to guar gum, in terms of commericial turbulence, are gelatin prices. Since late 2010 the food industry has faced a constant problem with supply, as guar gum is now being heavily used in the oil and gas industry, for the process of fracking, causing an increase in demand and prices to rise. As guar gum is used in a variety of products, from Asian speciality drinks, to dried processed food, canned foods, bakery, noodles and dairy products, manufacturers are going to have to look towards innovation in order to reduce the overall cost of the product, claimed Euromonitor in a September 2011 review of guar gum supply challenges. “One solution, of course, is to replace guar gum with another ingredient, such as starch derivatives, locust bean gum or xanthan gum. As prices for guar gum continue to rise, manufacturers will have to think carefully about how long they can endure the rising costs or whether reformulation needs to take place,” wrote Euromonitor. The authors noted that the price of xanthan gum is now not far off the current price of guar gum and so is becoming a more likely replacement in products. “Nevertheless, it is not a simple issue of price, as each ingredient has different stabilising properties and gives a different texture to the end product. The question, therefore, has to be asked that if the end product were to change, if is this a risk brand manufacturers would be willing to take,” asked the analysts.  
The way in which we perceive the sweetness of a food or drink is does not affect dietary choices or energy intake, reveal researchers. The study – published in Journal of Food Science – investigated how differences in the perceived sweetness intensity of a food affect choice behaviours and dietary intake. The authors, led by led by Dr Sara Cicerale of Deakin University, Australia, said their study is the first of its kind to investigate the correlation between sweetness intensity and specific food behaviours like preference for sweet tasting foods and nutrient intake. Cicerale and her colleagues found that although taste is an important consideration when choosing foods, the perceived sweetness intensity alone does not have a significant influence on food behaviour or caloric dietary intake.“Taste perceptions from foods and beverages are considered to be one of the main drivers of food selection and appear to play a pivotal role in determining one's food preference and habitual diet,” said Cicerale and her team.“Overall, perceived sweetness intensity does not appear to play a role in food behaviours relating to sugar consumption and dietary intake in adults,” they confirmed.It is believed that a greater understanding of how taste influences food choices and caloric intake of foods can assist industry to formulate products in the face of pressure from govenments and consumer groups due to the growing obesity epidemic.Taste preference?Until now most research investigating the links between taste and food selection and acceptance have been carried out using the bitter compound, 6-n-propylthiouracil (PROP), explained the research team. They said that such research has generally suggested that people sensitive to PROP tend to dislike specific bitter-tasting vegetables and consume a smaller quantity of vegetables in general. However, very little research has been conducted on the other 4 taste qualities (and on the potentially new taste, fat) in terms of taste sensitivity, dietary intake, and preference, they said. However the team added that an elevated preference for sweet taste has previously been associated with a greater intake of added sugars, sweet foods, and carbohydrate-rich foods.“Therefore, an individual's sensitivity to sweet taste may be linked to the number of sweet receptors present in both the oral cavity and gut, and may affect the type and quantity of food consumed,” suggested Cicerale and her co-workers.The new study therefore investigated the relationship between perceived sweetness intensity and food behaviours relating to sugar consumption, and dietary intake – an area where Cicerale noted that little research has been done thus far.Research detailsIn the new study, Cicerale and her team assessed whether a persons’ perception of sweetness affected total dietary intake (caloric intake) using data from 130 participants. Each volunteer unit completed a food and diet questionnaire, two 24-hr food records, a food variety survey, and a perceived sweetness intensity measurement. “The perceived sweetness intensity measurement test consisted of the subjects being given a sucrose solution to taste and then rating how sweet they felt the solution was,” explained the researchers.“Out of the 130 students that participated, no correlation was observed between perceived sweetness and total caloric intake,” they revealed.“Perceived sweetness intensity measured via a sucrose solution did not play a role in specific food behaviours, sweet food consumption, or more generally the dietary intake of young adults,” said Cicerale.However they noted that the importance of taste when choosing food to consume was considered to be ‘extremely’ or ‘very’ important for most participants.  Source: Journal of Food Science Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3841.2011.02473.x “The Association between Perceived Sweetness Intensity and Dietary Intake in Young Adults”Authors: S. Cicerale, L.J. Riddell, R.S.J. Keast 
Photo Credit: Finsbury FoodsUK-based bakery firm Finsbury Foods has announced improved sales in a first quarter (Q1) trading driven by significant gains in its export business, but high commodity prices continue to squeeze profit margins.The group’s total sales revenues surpassed £100m (€120.7m) for the first time in the company’s history to £102m (€123.1), representing 16% organic growth on last year.The company saw growth in both its UK Cake and free form business, but the strongest growth came in its joint venture export business Lightbody Europe, which experienced growth of 167%.Lightbody is based in Hamilton, UK and employs around 1,000 people. The business has two bakeries plus a European sales and marketing operation based in Rennes, France.Finsbury CEO John Duffy said: “The Group has reached an important milestone, with over £100m sales in the first half. This demonstrates our resilience and more importantly the quality and appeal of our product ranges with consumers.”High commodity pricesHowever, the company said in its statement that despite efforts to optimise operations, year-on-year commodity inflation had meant profit margins were lower than the previous year.Analysts from investment banking firm Panmure said they expected operating margins to decline 3.3% on the previous year, but due to a lower interest charge, they still forecast 16% growth to £2.1m (€2.5m).“Over the past twelve months Finsbury’s shares have increased by 18%, which we believe reflects the progress being made at returning the business to top line growth and strengthening its balance sheet. We reiterate our buy recommendation,” they said.Tougher Q2The company itself said that it expects a tougher Q2.“The second half and consequently full year growth rates will not be as high as the first half as the Group has now reached the anniversary of last year's new product launches, European contract gains and increased promotional activity levels,” it said. “The trading environment remains very tough, with the challenges of a financially squeezed shopper, and stubbornly high commodity and input price inflation,” it continued.Finsbury said that it would invest in all its business to improve operating efficiencies, though CEO John Duffy warned that commodity inflation would continue to squeeze margins in the short-term. 
Cocoa giant, Barry Callebaut will become a first choice source of cocoa and chocolate for ice cream manufacturer Unilever under a new long-term global partnership.Under the new agreement, Unilever will source 70% of its cocoa and chocolate products from Barry Callebaut and will see volumes double under the arrangement. Barry Callebaut is investing €18m (US$24m) into its global factory network to cater to the increased capacity demands under the terms, with volume increases set to be met within 12 months. Kevin Havelock, president of Unilever’s Refreshment Category, said: “Our ice cream category has a significant role to play in Unilever’s sustainable growth model to deliver our ambition of doubling the size of our business while reducing our environmental impact.” “We need partners like Barry Callebaut to help us extend this position and achieve our overall aim,” Havelock added. The two companies already have strong business ties with sustainable cocoa sourcing commitments and the launch of the Magnum ice cream brand.  
The US-based Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine (PCRM) has taken shock tactics to consumers by posting two huge billboards in New York warning of what it claims are the obesity-related dangers of eating cheese.The Washington-based non-profit organisation has sponsored the billboards (pictured), and PCRM president Neal Barnard, MD said he had written to members of the City of Albany school board.His message to the city? “Cut down on dairy products served in schools to help students reduce the risk of childhood obesity.”Warning that cheese, in particular, posed a health and contributed to the area’s high obesity rates, Barnard said: “Typical cheeses are 70% fat. And the type of fat they hold is mainly saturated fat, the kind that increases your risk of heart disease and diabetes.“Cheese is also loaded with cholesterol and sodium. Americans eat more than 33 pounds (approximately 15kg) of cheese per person per year, three times more than they did in 1970, and our country is more obese than ever.”According to figures quoted by the PCRM, 59% of New York State residents are either overweight or obese, with the figures even higher in Albany County: 63% of adults overweight or obese.The New York State Department of Health has said that the state faces a childhood obesity crisis, with one out of every four people under the age of 18 obese, while the obesity rate for children between 6-11 years has quadrupled over 30 years.The PCRM said that Albany school lunches included an abundance of cheesy foods, and that the city’s high school menu included “dairy and fat-loaded offerings” such as chicken parmesan and thee-cheese lasagna, while cheese pizzas were sold every day.Giving dairy its due?Asked what he thought of the billboards, Tam Fry, from the UK-based National Obesity Forum (NOF) told DairyReporter.com that similar tactics were being adopted in the US states of Florida and Georgia. “It’s a really divided thing. It’s certain that cheese is full of fat, and therefore could be considered as not being very healthy.“However, it remains a dairy product, one of the essential food groups. Clearly then, the advice is that cheese is beneficial to health. However, too much cheese can be detrimental, because it can contribute to furring of the arteries, and therefore lead to cardiovascular problems.“Using a traffic light system, cheese qualifies for a red light saying ‘don’t eat or eat only rarely’. But cheese is hugely beneficial to children – because it has a lot of other attributes, look at calcium for teeth – but there again it should also be eaten in moderation.“But where these posters are really advantageous is drawing attention to products such as cheeseburgers,” Fry added. “You never know what cheese is being used in these. So it’s a shock, in your face. "However, it’s the kind of tactic that we may need and may see more of in the future, because we have obesity levels at such a rate (not just in the UK but worldwide), that something drastic has got to be done to ameliorate it."Dietary Guidelines for AmericansCheese was pinpointed by the PCRM as the number-one source of saturated fat in the US diet, and the Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2010 back this up, although they recommend consumers increase intake of fat-free milk or low-fat milk and milk products, such as milk, yogurt, cheese or fortified soy beverages.Chapter 3 of the guidelines lists major saturated fatty acids sources in the US diet: with full-fat cheese responsible for 8.5% of total intake, followed by pizza (5.9%), grain-based deserts (5.8%), dairy-based desserts (5.6%), chicken and chicken-mixed dishes (5.5%) and sausage, franks, bacon, ribs (4.9%).The guidelines note that although the body uses saturated fatty acids for physiological and structural functions, “it makes more than enough to meet those needs”.Thus, people have no dietary requirement for saturated fat, the guidelines state, while a “strong body of evidence indicated that higher intake of most dietary saturated acids is associated with higher levels of blood total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein (LDL)”, risk factors for cardiovascular disease.Thus, the guidelines suggest consuming less that 10% of calories from saturated fatty acids and replacing these with monounsaturated or polyunsaturated alternatives.However, the 2010 US guidelines  do recommend retaining dairy, meat and poultry in the diet as valuable sources of natural trans fatty acids, although they also note that cheese is responsible for 8% of solid fats in the national diet. 
A Danish meat lobby group is suing the Danish government over the country’s recently introduced 'fat tax' on foods, claiming the levy fails to comply with EU legislation.The tarrif, which faced intense opposition from the food industry, applies to foods containing more than 2.3% saturated fat, and came into force on October 1 last year.The surcharge, levied on foods such as cheese, butter, pizza, biscuits, oils and meats, is intended to help combat obesity and heart disease but the Danish Butchers Association (DSM), which has launched the legal challenge over the fat tax, claims it distorts competition between small and large businesses and violates the Lisbon Treaty. The meat group’s comments echo those of the European Dairy Association back in October, with the trade body claiming levy would increase administrative burdens for Danish and foreign industries.In addition, the EDA argued it would and create inequality between domestic and imported products due to taxation differences, with taxes dependent either solely on the content of saturated fats and the addition of fats used when foods were prepared in Denmark. "This creates an imbalance in the internal market which has to be discussed on European level," the EDA said.The legislation is part of a growing trend in Europe to impose so called ‘sin taxes’ on food and drinks associated with poor health and obesity.This month also saw French lawmakers approve legislation for a tax on sugar-sweetened beverages in the country.The duty, originally proposed last year, will form part of French austerity measures passed to help battle the debt crisis. The tax is expected to generate around €120m ($156m) in revenue for the French government. And last year Hungary introduced a levy on goods with high fat, sugar and salt content, including soft drinks. Now, the Polish government, according to domestic media reports, is also said to be weighing up the benefits of introducing similar measures.The pan-European food industry body, Food and Drink Europe, opposes fat taxes because it views them as being “discriminatory”. The group has emphasised that such measures unfairly target particular types of food when it is overall dietary habits that are the problem (the argument that there are no bad foods par se, just bad diets). It also states that such taxes unfairly prejudice the lower-income sections of society that typically purchase the affected foodstuffs in the greatest numbers. Germany's agriculture minister, Ilse Aigner, has also criticised such measures, saying in an interview with a German newspaper recently that such legislative approaches only serve to dictate what people should eat.  
An MEP has questioned the validity of the European Food Safety Authority’s (EFSA) review of aspartame following what she claims was support from the agency’s scientists for a statement backing the safety of the sweetener. Dutch lawmaker Kartika Liotard, in an email to this publication, said EFSA scientists Vittorio Silano and John Christian Larsen supported the findings of last week’s conference - No-Calorie Intense Sweeteners - Focus on Safety of Use - which held that there are no health risks in relation to aspartame use in food and beverages and that all low and no-calorie sweeteners currently on the market are safe.The event was organised by the Nutrition Foundation of Italy and the Italian Association of Dietetics and Clinical Nutrition on 11 January.Liotard said: “The EFSA apartame re-evaluation will not be ready before September 2012. It is questionable if this review is still an independent and unprejudiced one, after this statement.”The MEP said she is tabling a series of questions to the European Commission in relation to the EFSA review of aspartame, asking it to respond on whether it still believes that the re-evaluation of the sweetener is a “reliable and unbiased one.”But EFSA told FoodNavigator.com that it “wishes to clarify a number of misleading statements following recent media coverage of the Italian conference."A spokesperson for the agency stressed that Professor Silano and Professor John Larsen (former chair of EFSA’s Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources added to Food – ANS) were invited to the conference as “independent experts”. The spokesperson added: “Professor Vittorio Silano, chair of EFSA’s Scientific Committee, reaffirms any definitive statement on the safety of aspartame at this time is premature pending EFSA’s full re-evaluation."  “EFSA has carried out a substantial body of work on aspartame over the years, reviewing studies on aspartame (and other sweeteners) published since the evaluations of the former Scientific Committee on Food. EFSA has kept the public regularly updated on its work on aspartame with all related information available on its website,” said the representative.  
Dairy Crest could be the next UK processor to find itself the subject of a takeover approach, while Müller will have to leverage its stronger market position to secure stronger growth in the country, analysts have suggested.Shore Capital analysts Clive Black and Darren Shirley wrote in a recent note on Müller’s approach for Robert Wiseman’s that, “the most direct read across from the interest in Wiseman is naturally for the Dairy Crest Group”, but said they did not make this move or conclude that Dairy Crest “will be next”.However, hinting that the Wiseman interest would likely warm up Dairy Crest’s share price, the analysts added: “We have long felt that the future for quoted UK dairy sector [firms] would eventually be grounded among agricultural and private organisations, and this seems to be coming to pass."Noting Arla Foods’ acquisition of Express/MD Foods (now Arla Foods UK) and periodic past interest in Dairy Crest from the likes of French giant Groupe Lactalis, the analysts said that corporate interest in Dairy Crest remained to be seen.But Black and Shirley wrote: “However, we would not be surprised to see the group, in its present form or in different compositions, within such agricultural-based, and probably European farmers’ hands at that, in due course.”Weak milk growth prospectsElsewhere, pouring over the small print of German processor Müller’s prospective £279.5m (€335m) for Wiseman, the UK’s second-largest dairy company, Ildiko Szalai, senior company analyst at Euromonitor International gave her take on the deal.Although Müller would become the largest UK dairy player following the purchase, the category offered the company weak growth prospects over the 2011-2016 period, she told DairyReporter.com.She said: “The newly acquired company is strongest in private label milk, which is highly commoditised in the UK and therefore offers narrow profit margins. Over the long term, Müller will need to aim to leverage its strengthened market presence, infrastructure and brand portfolio into higher-margin, more dynamically growing categories of the dairy market.”By integrating Wiseman, Müller would assume a 7% share in UK dairy, overtaking current leader Dairy Crest in the drinking milk products category, Szalai said.She added that this category was worth US $6.2bn (€4.8bn) in the UK, more than twice the size of Müller’s current core category, yogurt, which was worth $2.8bn.Szalai said: “Müller’s strong foothold in drinking milk via this acquisition is necessary for the company to gain leadership and significant operational infrastructure in the UK market.”Müller moves beyond yogurtBut she warned that the UK drinking milks market was expected to decline in value by $92m from 2011-16, while value gains in yogurt were forecast to exceed $360m over the same period. Cheese was also identified as another key growth driver in UK dairy, with a CAGR of 2% from 2011-2016, equating to additional value sales of $336m.Szalai noted that Wiseman was the third-largest branded milk supplier (with its Black & White brand), but also counted Tesco and Sainsbury’s as major retail customers, and had supplied all the Co-Operative Group’s private label milk since last August. She added: “Müller’s core operations, however, are in yogurt, which accounts for some 74% of its total dairy sales. Prior to the acquisition, Müller’s drinking milk activities were largely limited to the German market, where it generated some $103m in the category, equating to around 5% of the company’s global dairy sales.” 
All-natural brine system to replace phosphates in poultry applicationsAn all-natural, clean label brine system has been developed through a collaborative project with three major UK and Irish ingredients companies to offer an improved solution to phosphate replacements in poultry applications.The ’All Natural Brine System’, is the work of Irish functional ingredient manufacturer Marigot, Irish blending company AllinAll Ingredients and UK ingredients supplier Naturis.The blend is comprised of Marigot’s algae derivative ingredient Aquamin and other natural ingredients.It offers an “all-natural, clean label, E-number free solution to phosphate replacement in poultry meats,” according to David O’Leary, commercial manager at Marigot.Daniel Hickey, managing director of AllinAll Ingredients also told FoodNavigator.com that, “unlike starches and other ingredients currently used in phosphate free products, our all natural brine works to both open up the meat texture and hold moisture. Phosphates work in the same way. This is the reason that our product is a genuine alternative.”By increasing moisture content, not only is yield increased before and after cooking but the higher moisture content means that the chicken is more succulent and therefore tastes better, Hickey added. The ingredient also reduces the loss of fats and water from the meat which occurs during cooking, and improves colour.Natural demandsO’Leary said the development of the system was a reaction from the “growing demand driven by retailers and consumers looking for more natural products with no e-numbers.”There is also an awareness of potential legislation for phosphate replacement in the meat sector, he said.“The three companies came together with a view to launching a brine system that delivers functional properties and an all-natural alternative to phosphate containing poultry brines,” Marigot’s commercial manager continued.Hickey noted that the drive to remove phosphates is coming from retailers and that as a result producers are looking for alternatives. The brine system is being marketed by AllinAll Ingredients as part of its functional ingredients portfolio and will be aimed at the international meat market, with particular focus on the UK and the rest of Europe, as well as Middle East markets. 
Retailers need to work with manufacturers and regulators to track the impact of systems such as traffic light labelling on consumer purchasing behaviour of food and drink products, stresses a Brussels-based consumer information group as it releases a new report.“Each time a new labelling system is introduced on a range, be in private label or a branded product line, we need clearer evidence as to whether it is influencing sales, and supermarkets are best placed to carry out such research,” said Dr Josephine Wills, the director general of the European Food Information Council (EUFIC), speaking to FoodNavigator.com this morning. The Council released its Global Update on Nutrition Labelling today, which highlights global regulatory moves on food labelling since the EUFIC report from June 2011, assesses what knowledge gaps remain, and calls for more research to see how consumers can best be helped to make good use of nutrition labels.Dr Wills said that existing analysis by retailers on consumer behaviour in an online setting looking at the traffic light labelling format showed that despite various food categories having a red light attached to the product - indicating a high content of fat, saturated fat, sugars and salt - such nutrition flags had limited influence on actual purchasing.“We need to determine what consumers really buy and not what they say they would do when questioned on the subject in surveys,” added the EUFIC director general.The Council’s report also summarises the final results of the three year-long FLABEL project (Food Labelling to Advance Better Education for Life), with EUFIC one of the partners on the initiative along with academic experts and retailers.Wills said that FLABEL shows that consumers, unless they have an interest in healthy eating, generally lack the motivation to scan nutrition tables. FLABEL also found that food packages held consumers’ visual attention for very short periods, with the average attention to elements of nutrition labels being between 25 and 100 milliseconds, as measured by sophisticated eye-tracking equipment. Scientific advisor to the labelling research project, Professor Klaus Grunert, of Aarhus University in Denmark, claims “the FLABEL research shows the most promising option for increasing consumers’ attention to, and use of, nutrition information on food labels, is to provide information on key nutrients and energy on the front of the pack, in a consistent way. “Complementing this information with a health logo can also increase attention to, and use of, the information, especially when the consumer is under time pressure. Similarly, use of colour coding can increase attention and use in certain situations, although the effects of both are not strong.”EUFIC’s study takes account of the introduction of FIR in the EU in September and, in terms of the global outlook, the publication reviews the Australia and New Zealand governments’ decision to reject traffic light labelling recommendations in the Labelling Logic report at its meeting last month. “It has opted for further consultation instead with a view to agreeing a front of pack (FOB) system by the end of 2012,” notes Wills.The study also notes the system - not yet consumer tested - recently put forward by the Institute of Medicine (IOM) in the US, recommending the use of symbols for FOB display to graphically convey calories counts by serving size and a ‘point’ value indicating whether trans and sat fats, sodium and added sugars are below threshold levels.The Executive Summary of EUFIC's global update on nutrition labelling can be read here . 
SABMiller said today that ‘intense competition’ within European lager led to a fall in beer volume sales during the last quarter, but the brewer told BeverageDaily.com that it didn’t think there was a fundamental problem with the category in this market or the US.The $28bn turnover firm (March 2011), which produces the Pilsner, Peroni, Miller and Grolsch brands, revealed its muted European performance in an interim management statement released by today, covering the third quarter (Q3) ending December 31.Overall, SABMiller reported that lager production volumes were 3% up on Q3 2010, due to good growth in all regions except Europe and the US, while soft drink volumes grew 6% in all regions.Organic revenue – discounting profits, growth from mergers and acquisitions – grew by 7% when currency fluctuations were discounted, while SAB saw mix gains in all regions apart from Europe.Describing quarterly performance in line with expectations, SAB noted that US domestic retail sales (MillerCoors) fell 3.3%; European lager volume sales slumped 2%, with beer markets there “affected by intense competition, which continued negatively to impact, as well as fragile economic conditions”.BeverageDaily.com asked SABMiller whether it saw declining European and US volumes as a blip – due to, say, recessionary pressures, high taxes – or a more fundamental identity crisis for the beer category, as suggested by Euromonitor International within the UK market .US beer drinkers unemployedA SABMiller spokesman told BeverageDaily.com: “There’s definitely not a fundamental problem with beer, and it’s wrong to equate the US and European markets together.“The US market is very different to our European markets. In the former, beer is in many ways in very good health. Take the vibrant craft beer segment growing strongly [Tenth and Blake saw double-digit Q3 growth] and huge interest in the overall beer category, which is encouraging.“The difficulty for us is that our big premium light brands are exposed to areas of the economy that are still struggling. Look at the unemployment rate within the core demographic of beer drinkers in the US and it’s still quite high. So it’s very largely an economic story here.”Within SABMiller’s core European markets – Central, Eastern Europe and Russia – there was also strong consumer interest in the category, the spokesman said: “Again, the problem macroeconomic to a certain degree, but the primary difference is that we’ve seen a lot of competitive pricing pressure, with competitors dropping prices for mainstream beer categories.“They’re promoting economy brands now, and that’s a certain amount of profit out of those markets.”Emerging market promiseSABMiller takes around 70% of its profits from emerging markets, and within Latin America lager volumes were up 8% (soft drinks +8%), with SAB’s non-alcoholic malt brands a telling success story, up 21% and now rolled-out across Central America.In that region lager volumes grew 6% with particularly strong performance in El Salvador; Asia Pacific and Chinese lager volumes grew 7% and 5% respectively, and Indian volumes 21%.This success was replicated in Africa with lager volume growth of 11% despite capacity constraints, and the spokesman confirmed that SAB Miller would be interested in potentially acquiring French firm Castel’s interest in an African joint alliance, with a £6bn deal mooted in some quarters.Under an existing agreement SABMiller has a 20% share in Castel’s African beverage interests and Castel has a 38% in SABMiller’s main African holding company.Castel African interest confirmedThe spokesman said: “We’ve got a big overlapping interest in each other’s operations, and given that fact, it’s probably stating the obvious to say that if Castel was interested in a sale, we probably would be interested in buying-up their interest in the alliance. “But it is worth noting that they’ve given no indication that they have any interest in selling up.”SABMiller said on Monday that it was trialing premium brand Miller Genuine Draft, in the Zhejiang region of China, with the company looking to “test the potential for its international brand with a premium beer imported from the USA”.Ari Mervis, SABMiller’s Asia Pacific MD, said: “This is an exciting opportunity to introduce one of our international brands into the fast-growing premium segment in China, in a way that takes advantage of [exclusive importer] China Resources Snow Breweries’ (CR Snow’s) strong market position.”CR Snow owns ‘Snow’ (pictured) the largest beer brand in China and the world by volume: in 2010 the firm held a 21% share of the Chinese beer market with sales of more than 92m hectoliters. 
Exceptional sales growth for sugar will fuel expansion at Associated British Foods (ABF), say food industry analysts, even if Q1 continued to highlight struggles for the food ingredients side of the business. ABF’s interim management statement today reveals 12% sales growth for the group for the 16 weeks to 7 January, with revenues for its sugar division 21% ahead of last year based on higher regional sugar prices, particularly in Europe.While management at the UK food group warns about economic uncertainty, Graham Jones, market analyst at Panmure Jones, said subsiding input costs will now start to benefit ABF as a whole and the company is the analyst firm’s top large capitalization stocks pick for 2012.Sugar Jones notes that sugar production in the UK is estimated to be 1.25mt this year, much higher than last year’s weather affected crop of just under 1.0mt, and “this together with higher prices should drive strong profits growth.”Cane production in China continues to be held back by last year’s drought, but beet production is expected to be significantly ahead. “Overall, this supports our forecast of a 40% rise in EBITA this year to £440m,” added Jones.Ingredients' challenges Ingredients sales rose by 2% during Q1 for the food group, but difficulties seen at AB Mauri’s yeast and bakery ingredients businesses, particularly in H2 last year, have continued into H1 this year, and margins are expected to fall in H1, noted Jones. Meanwhile he said better progress appears to have been made at ABF Ingredients, although “we still expect divisional profits for the year to fall modestly to £55m (€65m) in 2012,” added the market specialist. Darren Shirley, a market analyst at Shore Capital said the firm is upgrading its 2011/12 EBIT forecast by 10% to £440m for the ABF sugar division, with “further upward potential seen as we move through the year.”Bread and meat ABF reported that high promotional activity has affected margins at its bread brand Kingsmill, and management is said to be reviewing the baker's cost base, revealed Shirley in a note.The ABF management also confirmed that H1 profits will be adversely impacted by the ongoing restructuring costs in Australian meats – where costs continue to be too high, though ‘progress’ is reported in improving productivity. “We believe the next 12 months are important for the prospects of meat in the ABF portfolio. With the commentary on Kingsmill margins, and the potential for further restructuring costs in both UK Bakery and Australia, we take £25m from our FY2011/12 Grocery EBIT to £225m,” added Shirley. 
The discovery of a 'nourishing gene' that controls how nutrients are distributed in plants and crops could offer hope for improved crop yield and increased food production, say researchers. The research – published in Current Biology – reveals the discovery of a new gene, called Meg1, that regulates the amount of nutrients transferred from plants to their seeds. The research team behind the discovery, from the University of Warwick, UK, said the finding is a significant step which could help increase global food production."These findings have significant implications for global agriculture and food security, as scientists now have the molecular know-how to manipulate this gene by traditional plant breeding or through other methods to improve seed traits, such as increased seed biomass yield,” said Dr Jose Gutierrez-Marcos, who led the research."This understanding of how maize seeds and other cereal grains develop – for example in rice and wheat - is vital as the global population relies on these staple products for sustenance,” he added.Research detailsThe team, who worked in collaboration with the University of Oxford and agricultural biotech research company Biogemma, identified named Meg1 only on maternal chromosomes. They noted that such uniparental gene expression, called imprinting, is unusual but not unknown in all plants and animals.While scientists have known for a while of the existence of such imprinted genes in humans and other mammals, this is the first time a similar gene to regulate nutrient provisioning during seed development has been identified in the plant world, said the researchers.The findings mean that scientists can now focus on using the gene and understanding the mechanism by which it is expressed to increase seed size and productivity in major crop plants."To meet the demands of the world's growing population in years to come, scientists and breeders must work together to safeguard and increase agricultural production," explained Gutierrez-Marcos."While the identification of MEG1 is an important discovery in its own right, it also represents a real breakthrough in unravelling the complex gene pathways that regulate the provisioning and nutritional content of seeds," added Professor Hugh Dickinson of Oxford University's Department of Plant Sciences – who also contributed to the study. Source: Current Biology Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.11.059 “Maternal Control of Nutrient Allocation in Plant Seeds by Genomic Imprinting”Authors: L.M. Costa, J. Yuan, J. Rouster, W. Paul, H. Dickinson, J.F. Gutierrez-Marcos 
The European Cocoa Association (ECA) has joined the association of Primary Food Processors (PFP).PFP is a body representing the European primary food processing industry while ECA members make up over two-thirds of Europe’s cocoa bean grinding, half of Europe's industrial chocolate production and 40 % of the world production of cocoa liquor, butter and powder.ECA chairman Martin Versteeg, said: “We strongly believe in synergies between EU first‐processing industries’ interests on EU regulatory issues – PFP offers a valuable platform to increase our share of voice in Brussels.”PFP will now be made up of six sector associations working in flour, starch, sugar, cocoa, vegetable protein, vegetable oil and meal products. 
Recent trading momentum does not favour Premier Foods’ bid to get the upper hand in pending refinancing talks, claim market watchers.Yesterday’s statement by management at the UK food group was not encouraging, said Shore Capital analyst Clive Black, despite the team's stated ambition to double the cost savings of £20m outlined in October last year to over £40m.Premier announced a series of cost saving programmes to be initiated throughout the year that will result in reductions in the workforce - expected to amount to around 5% of the company’s current workforce of around 12,000 employees. The food group stressed that discussions over a re-financing package “continue to make progress and it is anticipated that an appropriate agreement will be reached soon.”But Black cautions: “We note that there is no mention of Premier’s year-end debt position in this update.”  And Shore Capital said its does not believe recent trading momentum especially enhances Premier’s negotiating hand in this regard. Premier plans to use the savings resulting from its rationalisation plan to double the marketing spend for its eight power brands: Hovis, Ambrosia, Mr. Kipling, Sharwood’s, Loyd Grossman, Bisto, Oxo and Batchelors. But Black said that while Shore Capital had been positioning itself for a more sanguine stance on Premier Foods “subdued current trade, further downgrades to trading profits, the prospect of considerable redundancy costs impacting the 2102 financial out-turn, the uncertainty of refinancing and, if it does transpire at what cost, leaves us somewhat cold on the stock still.” He claims that such factors look set to undermine the “demonstrably improved” control that new Premier CEO Michael Clarke seems to be bringing to the company, the potential benefit from cost reduction in due course and the promise of an improved performance from the group’s power brands. Earlier this month saw media speculation that the UK food manufacturer was aiming to divest itself of its Hartley's jams and Hayward’s pickles businesses for over £200m (€242m) following on from the sale of its chilled foods division, Brookes Avana, and its Irish brands at the end of last year. Shore Capital analyst, Darren Shirley, told FoodNavigator.com that nothing can be ruled out in terms of Premier’s disposal plans, adding that Hartley’s is a good brand in what is not a high performing category. "It would provide a consolidation opportunity for another jam producer as it is still a profitable arena." But he flagged up analysts’ worries about the UK group’s “ever-decreasing circle”. Shirley added: “All Premier brands are potentially for sale but we remain concerned about the group’s capacity to generate enough cash flow if it continues to shrink.”Julian Wild, food group director at UK law firm, Rollits, agrees, and while he rates the new management team at Premier, he told this publication back in December: “Premier is desperate for cash. But the question is how, following these divestments, is the team going to be able to take the profits forward?” 
Arla Foods has signed an agreement with Russia’s third-largest dairy concern, Molvest Group, to establish its first production site in the country, which will produce yellow cheese.The co-operative revealed that its broader Russian strategy involves marketing high quality branded products within cities of more than 500,000 people, and establishing local production sites via joint ventures or acquisitions.Hailing a significant step into the Russian market – subject to regulatory approval – the Danish-Swedish company said the Molvest deal fitted with its ambition to become one of Russia’s leading dairy companies within yellow cheese.CEO, Arla, Peder Tuborgh, said: “This is unlikely to be our final expansion into the Russian market, but this agreement alone is expected to double our turnover in Russia before the end of 2015.”‘Quality’ product penetrationArla said its Russian business grew by around 30% in 2011 and now turns over approximately DKK 500m (€67.24m), with growth largely driven by the export success of Lurpak butter, Castello cheese and Arla Natura cream cheese.Tuborgh added: “As Russia is one of our strategic growth markets, this agreement is important because it provides us with the opportunity to combine our export business to Russia with local production.”After several years of Russian export growth, Arla said it had decided to establish local production – in the city of Kalacheevsky in southwest Russia – for the first time.Here, the co-operative’s subsidiary, Arla Foods Artis, will partner Molvest to convert one of the latter’s existing dairies for yellow cheese production.The venture will involve Molvest collecting milk from local farms before processing it at the dairy, the conversion of which will cost Arla DKK 25m.Thereafter, Arla will buy the milk and produce yellow cheese at the site for subsequent retail distribution and sale.With production scheduled to start in early 2013, Arla said the partners aimed to produce around 6,000 tonnes of cheese in 2014, with an annual volume increase thereafter of 10%.Hans Christensen, senior vice president at Arla, heads up the co-operative’s Russian, Polish and US operations, and he told DairyReporter.com that (after establishing a JV around five years ago) to establish Arla Foods Artis, dedicated production was the "natural next step". He said: “This new venture in Russia means that we can offer a broader range and supply larger volumes. This in turn will strengthen our position vis-à-vis the Russian retail sector and grow our exports from Scandinavia to Russia.“We’ve already seen similar effects in other markets such as the US, Germany and Canada.”Doing business in Russia...Christensen added that Russia was an attractive market because many consumers there were willing to pay for good quality food.He told this publication: "Our products are selling strongly, and we provide high quality products at what we call 'lower premium' - not upper premium - prices." "We are doing this to connect with that group of Russian consumers who have seen as big increase in living standards over the past 10 years or so, want international brands, and are willing to pay for that quality, although our products also provide good value for money."With its headquarters in the Russian city of Voronezh, Molvest turns over around US $250m, and manufactures at eight processing sites across Russia and one in the Ukraine; products include liquid milk, butter, fermented milk drinks and cheese.Asked whether Arla had any concerns about doing business in Russia - given reports of problems for Western firms - Christensen said that the firm did not envisage any, had built strong levels of trust with Molvest over the past 18 months, and also had good relationships with retailers in the country.Arla acquired 75% of Artis Distribution in 2007 and subsequently established its Russian presence in the country (Arla Foods Artis) focused on selling Scandinavian cheese and butter.Terms and conditions of the deal are subject to approval from the Russian Federal Antimonopoly Service (FAS). 
Israeli supplier LycoRed is touting its tomato lycopene-based natural red colour as a replacement for carmine in applications such as surimi. Surimi – a Japanese word literally meaning "ground meat" – refers to fish-based food products that mimic the texture and colour of crab and lobster meat. It is made from fish protein prepared from white fish flesh that is mixed with ingredients, including starches, egg white and flavourings. Roee Nir, colour and flavour global commercial manager for Lycored, said that surimi product manufacturers globally have been trying to find a substitute for carmine, due to what he claims is growing consumer aversion and possible allergy links to that colour, which is extracted from cochineal insects. He told FoodNavigator.com that in comparison to other natural colours, its lycopene-derived red is heat and pH stable and does not migrate during the surimi production process. It has been tested thoroughly by the Israel headquartered company's lead customers in the surimi manufacturing sector, and is now ready for wider release, added Nir.Carmine is often blended with paprika to achieve the correct shade for the local surimi market and LycoRed said its tomato lycopene formulations are blendable with paprika and any other colours to allow manufactures retain such flexibility.Nir said that while Japan and the US are the priority markets for the new colour, the European and Chinese markets are developing quickly in terms of demand for surimi and LycoRed is looking to target those regions as well in relation to the red colorant. Traditionally popular in the Far East, surimi has become increasingly popular in Europe. European consumers, now more health-conscious than ever, are increasingly incorporating surimi and other fish-based products into their daily meals. And recent years has seen EU surimi production increasing substantially in France, the Baltic States and Spain.Meanwhile, R&D work is also underway at LycoRed, said Nir, to extend the use of the red colour to the meat analogue sector. He claims that the lycopene colorant, already used in range of other food and beverage applications, allows manufacturers to achieve the precise colour shade they want without compromising on flavour. 
A downturn in sales throughout Western Europe has seen Barry Callebaut fail to meet its projected growth for the first quarter. However the Swiss chocolate supplier said it is still outperforming the market.Manufacturing giant Barry Callebaut AG reported a "soft start" to its 2011-12 financial year – from September 2011 – with sales growing 2.6% by volume in the first quarter, compared to a forecast of around 4%. The company said that sales revenue grew by 3.2% in local currencies, but reported a 4.1% decrease in revenue in Swiss Franc (to 1.27 billion CHF) due to the strength of the Swiss currency.The leading manufacturer of cocoa and chocolate products said that despite failing to meet its own projections for the quarter, the company had outperformed the global chocolate market by achieving the 2.6% growth – with Nielsen reporting a that the global chocolate market declined by 0.7% over the same period.“After an expected soft start in the first two months of our fiscal year, we saw volume growth picking up in both our industrial as well as our Gourmet segment,” said Juergen Steinemann, CEO of Barry Callebaut.“Despite a challenging environment, we outperformed the market. We made excellent progress in our projects leading us further in the right strategic direction,” he said.European squeezeThe decline in volumes reflected a 0.8% slowdown in the European, where it said that "debt crisis in Europe negatively impacted consumer sentiment, especially in Southern Europe.” The chocolate and cocoa giant added that a “difficult market environment in Western Europe” contributed to the company’s lower than anticipated growth – though it added that that “good growth” in Eastern Europe, driven by Poland, Russia and the Baltic States, had gone some way to compensating for the difficulties seen in Southern and Western Europe.Sales revenue was reported to increase by 1.2% across Europe, however the company said that a strong CHF meant that this growth in local currencies was translated into a 8.2% fall in the reporting currency for the whole European region.Asian declineBarry Callebaut also disclosed a down-turn in growth across the Asia-Pacific region, where volumes grew by 2.7% in the September-to-November period – down from 10.4% over the previous 12 months.However, the company said the Asian slowdown was at least in part due to factory downtime while they expanded capacity at a Singapore plant.“The temporary production downtimes caused by the installation of new capacity also restrained growth during the period under review,” said Barry Callebaut.Long term growthSteinemann said that the company are ‘confident’ of reaching its long term financial targets of reaching an average of 6 to 8% growth in local currencies between the 2009/10 and 2012/13 financial years.Barry Callebaut revealed it had achieved ‘broad-based growth’ in all regional markets in the Americas and across all segments – where sales growth rocketed to 17.6%. Sales revenue for the Americas region grew 18.0% in local currencies (6.9% in reporting currency).The company recently announced a new outsourcing partnership with Mexian company Grupo Bimbo. As part of the contract Barry Callebaut will make up to 32,000 tonnes of chocolate a year for the Mexican foods giant. 
International Flavors and Fragrances (IFF) has set up a scientific advisory board, with the aim of broadening its scientific knowledge and accelerating innovation at the firm.The board is led by IFF’s senior vice president of research and development, Dr. Ahmet Baydar, and includes five top international scientists: Steven Ley, head of chemistry at the UK’s Cambridge University; Cheryl Perkins, former senior vice president and chief innovation officer at Kimberly-Clark; Thomas Sharkey, Michigan State University chair of biochemistry and molecular biology; Leslie Vosshall, molecular neurobiologist, trained in biochemistry and with expertise in olfactory receptors and perception; and Brian Willis, former senior vice president of R&D and board member at Quest Flavors and Fragrances.“We have an excellent R&D team but…we wanted to broaden our perspectives,” Baydar told FoodNavigator-USA.He described the scientific advisory board (SAB) as “global technical experts and also people who have connections in the area of R&D.”The idea of bringing outside experts together has been in the pipeline for the past 18 months to two years, Baydar said, with the aim of providing external perspectives, raising scientific issues, and identifying appropriate research partners.IFF chairman and CEO Doug Tough said in a statement: “The addition of this high-quality SAB to our R&D group will help us develop innovative solutions in our flavors and fragrances business and better serve our customers’ needs. We anticipate that it will give us strong competitive advantage not only by tapping into the minds of the board members, but by leveraging their access to a global network of academics, high-level industry members, and their associates.”The SAB met for the first time last week, and plans to meet about once a quarter, Baydar said. 
Big beer brands face something of a double bind in trying to stem the tide of declining UK beer sales and entice new consumers to the category, in a market where simply taking over small, successful craft brands risks diluting their appeal, according to a Mintel analyst.Statistics released by the research firm in December revealed that the UK market value of beer fell from £17.7bn (€21.3bn) in 2006 to £15.5bn in 2011 (lager alone accounted for £11.4bn that year) with overall volume sales down by 23% over this period.Speaking to BeverageDaily.com, senior drinks analyst Jonny Forsyth told BeverageDaily.com that – along with the recession and high alcohol prices that had hit the on trade – beer sales had also suffered due to public health campaigns concerning the ill-effects of alcohol.He said: “I also think people are more aware of healthy living, and being more prepared to sacrifice certain things to have a healthy lifestyle. Perhaps this never occurred to my father’s generation growing up in the 1960s and 1970s.”Despite equally high taxes, the UK wine category posted a value sales increase of 15% between 2006 and 2011, which suggested that beer firms had been relatively slow to innovate to meet consumer demand, Forsyth said.Beer was not seen as suitable for home drinking, food matching, relaxing or social/sharing situations, Forsyth said, mainly due to its predominating young male image that it was struggling to shed. Lager for the ladies…Nonetheless, Forsyth said there was a ready innovation pipeline to attract women, for instance to the category (with major NPD areas flavour and low-calorie beers), while Mintel research showed that 28% of UK lager drinkers were interested in sweet-tasting lagers, rising to 57% in the 18-24 age group.Forsyth said: “There are a lot more beers coming onto the market. I’ve seen a lot more brands that are pilsners or pale ales, in between an ale and a lager. There are a lot more fruit beers around, and Carling have brought out a brand called Animee lager in three different flavours [standard, rose and citrus].“There’s a lot of innovation suddenly going on – and lager is starting to go the same way as real ale. The industry is realizing that there’s a lot in that. Anime, for instance, is a Molson Coors brand.“That’s one of the first examples of a mainstream company thinking ‘OK, we really need to innovate’, where a lot of innovation normally comes from smaller companies. The big firms are starting to pick up on that and purchase and promote brands.” Small-scale innovationBut despite widespread product novation, there had not been much marketing to accompany innovative ales and lagers, since they mainly stemmed from smaller microbreweries, Forsyth said.“I think that takes a while to filter up to the top. Beer is all about scale, because UK taxation is so high that to make really good revenues you need to be producing high volumes.“So traditionally the beer companies consolidated to create global super brands that rode on this volume model. But they’re having to reassess this and think, ‘well consumers see these global brands as a little bit bland, boring and homogenised’.”Such firms were investing in smaller brands, but this took the major players out of their comfort zone, because there was different model for say, advertising, Forsyth said, where a firm might need to create 10 more specific campaigns rather than one.“However, one large company that’s done quite well on this model is SABMiller, which tends to buy up smaller local brands, and, rather than trying to turn them into global superbrands, encourages them in their local markets,” he added.But Forsyth warned that, nonetheless: “There’s a bit of a contradiction for these major companies trying to support smaller brands, because people are interested in more ‘authentic’ non mass-produced brands with more interesting flavours.”Consumer cynicism could easily set in when big firms took such brands over, he added, giving the US example of Chicago firm Goose Island and its brand 312 (a Chicago area telephone code) bought up by brewing giant Anheuser-Busch InBev.The Belgian giant then sought to roll out the phone code concept to other US cities, but Forsyth said this upset fans of the beer in Chicago."It’s a really difficult one for the major players," he said. "Because almost by buying these local brands, they risk taking away what made them so popular in the first place." 
A UK expert claims that a suggested 10% tax on sugar-sweetened soft drinks in the UK would be an ineffective means of tackling a rising obesity epidemic, but that an industry-led end to ‘pricing parity’ between sugared and sugar-free soft drinks could have a positive effect.Nutrition policy specialist Professor Jack Winkler made him remarks in a commentary piece written for the British Journal of Nutrition (BJN), specifically discussing a paper by Ng et al..Published in the same issue of the BJN, these researchers examined surveys of individual dietary intake data and household food expenditure in Great Britain between 1986 and 2009. They estimated the potential for pricing policy to “promote more healthful beverage purchase patterns” and reduce consumption of sugar-sweetened bevereages (SSBs).The team noted a fall in high-fat dairy product consumption and a trend towards fruit juices and reduced-fat milk amongst children, while amongst adults the same pattern was evident.Crucially, the researchers calculated that a 10% increase in the price of (SSBs ) could lead to a consumption decrease of 7.5ml per capita per day.A similar 10% tax on high-fat milk was associated with a reduction in the same terms of 5ml per day, and an increased reduced fat milk purchase of 7ml per day.“This analysis implies that taxation or other methods of shifting relative costs of these beverages could be a way to improve beverage choices in Great Britain,” the authors wrote in their abstract.Taxing times for soft drinks?But while he welcomed proposals to tax less healthy ingredients and foods – especially SSBs – as a positive development, Winkler warned that taxing such products was difficult.At the heart of the matter lay the economic concept of ‘price elasticity of demand’, he noted, where economists define demand as ‘elastic’ if a given sales decline is proportionate to or greater than the price increase.Since Ng et al.’s analysis showed that a 10% tax would only reduce purchases by 4-6%, this suggested that demand for soft drinks was “very unresponsive” or inelastic, he wrote.“In plain English, 7.5ml is 0.4% of the most popular two-litre bottle, less than a sip. It would not even cut sugar intake by a gram, only 12.6kj (3kcal),” Winkler wrote.Moreover, in the real world, consumers could save money by other means than cutting-back on purchases, Winkler observed. They might buy bigger bottles in cheaper shops and benefit from special offers, while brand loyalty was also an issue.With carbonates accounting for more consumption than other soft drinks and fruit juices combined, Winkler wrote that Coca-Cola and Pepsi successfully commanded a price premium of 950% (presuming a price of £1.89 for two litres of Coke at its most expensive), above retailer Asda’s cheapest private label equivalent at only 18p.Winkler said: “If consumers are willing to pay 950% extra for a brand they prefer, they are unlikely to be changed by a 10% tax.”Those proposing such taxes also needed to consider the political context, Winkler wrote, giving the example of a 2007 trade dispute with Brazil, in the aftermath of which the EU cut the price of sugar 36%.Fruit juice exemptionIt would be unlikely that any British politician would support a tax on less healthy foods, due to the risk of unpopularity for negligible health gain, he added.Furthermore, Winkler wrote, tax proponents targeting SSBs were tilting at ‘added sugar’ but exempting ‘unsweetened’ fruit juices, and should clarify whether taxes should also apply to juices high in sugar that had the same detrimental effects as added sugars.He wrote: “After soft drinks, fruit juices are the second largest source of sugars in the UK diet, ahead of chocolate biscuits and cakes. Given the many unavailing efforts to raise Britain’s meager fruit intakes, it is perhaps understandable that the tax was designed for ‘sugar sweetened’ rather than ‘sugar containing’ beverages. But anyone serious about reducing sugar cannot evade the issue.”Winkler said that, contrary to the ambivalent attitude that Ng et al., and bodies such as the UK Food Standards Agency (FSA) and the School Foods Trust, for instance, had towards sweeteners, for most British consumers “sweeteners are just a convenient means of cutting energy intake”.Before aspartame hit the UK market in 1981, sugarfree drinks cornered only 4% of the UK market, but this had now risen to 37% of carbonates alone, Winkler noted, citing Zenith International research figures.“Shifting consumers from sugared to sugarfree drinks cuts more sugar, more quickly, than trying to depress SSB sales. Any tax on added sugar would reinforce the trend, encouraging manufacturers to use more sweeteners, as in the 1990s," he wrote.But if any added sugar tax was not applied to sweeteners, then it could be a “first, small step towards opening a price differential between sugared and sugarfree drinks,” Winkler suggested, where this price variation really could impact SSB consumption.Enforced parity pricingHowever, the major brands enforced parity pricing between sugared and sugarfree variants of drinks, although the latter were much cheaper to produce, he added, with producers effectively charging a ‘health premium’ for such products that consumers believed were beneficial in terms of weight control.But since prices for aceK and aspartame were much lower than sugar, Winkler told BeverageDaily.com, companies could cut the price of sugarfree very substantially. He said: “That would create a differential that consumers would recognise. And respond to, by changing their purchases, while still remaining within the soft drinks sector.”Winkler told this publication he was trying to raise the stakes to encourage industry to help tackle an obesity epidemic. He said: “In sum, yes creating a price differential between sugared and sugar-free is the goal. But a tax-and-exemption strategy is an ineffective way to achieve it. Much quicker and more effective is a margin adjustment to create a ‘health incentive’.”Title: ‘Invited commentary: Why soft drinks taxes will not work’Author: J.Winkler, Nutrition Policy Unit, London, UKSource: British Journal of Nutrition 2011, doi:10.1017/S0007114511006477 
BASF has announced it will halt all GM operations in Europe due to a lack of acceptance.Ingredients and chemicals giant BASF has announced it will pull the plug on its European operations in genetically modified plant development due to a lack of acceptance in the market.The German chemical and biotechnology company said it would relocate the headquarters of its BASF Plant Science group from Limburgerhof in Germany, to Raleigh in the USA. The company added that it will be concentrating its plant biotechnology activities on its main markets in North and South America in the future.The company added that its development and commercialisation of all GM products targeted solely at cultivation in the European market will be halted – these include four varieties of potato and one of wheat.“We are convinced that plant biotechnology is a key technology for the 21st century. However, there is still a lack of acceptance for this technology in many parts of Europe – from the majority of consumers, farmers and politicians,” said Dr. Stefan Marcinowski, a member of the BASF board of executive directors, responsible for plant biotechnology.“It does not make business sense to continue investing in products exclusively for cultivation in this market,” he said. “We will therefore concentrate on the attractive markets for plant biotechnology in North and South America and the growth markets in Asia.”Acceptance for innovation?BASF cited a lack of consumer and industry acceptance as the main reason for its decision to halt European operations in GM products. It added that the decision to relocate to the USA was taken because there is “less resistance” to the technology.The announcement was celebrated by environmental campaign groups Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth: “This is another nail in the coffin for genetically modified foods in Europe,” said Adrian Bebb of Friends of the Earth.Whilst Greenpeace EU agriculture policy director Marco Contiero said the announcement shows that “BASF admits Europeans don’t want GM crops.” “Europeans are not alone in rejecting GM food,” he added. “BASF’s retreat to the Americas follows a string of defeats for the industry over the last two years in China, India, the Philippines, Thailand and elsewhere. Over 90% of GM food crops are grown in just four countries in the Americas.”However, the move by BASF has also been also been seen a major blow for science and innovation in the European market. Professor Denis Murphy of the University of Glamorgan, UK, warned that Europe “is now in danger of becoming a scientific backwater and will be unable to assist developing countries the address food insecurity.” “There is now a danger that we will lose, not only companies like BASF, but also academic researchers and students – as well as any influence that we have had previously in developing countries where we used to be major providers of assistance and expertise,” argued Murphy – an expert in biotechnology.RelocationBASF said it will adjust the portfolio and site footprint of its plant science to reflect the move. The chemical giant said the move to new headquarters for activities in the area of plant biotechnology at Raleigh in North Carolina will see the current HQ site in Limburgerhof, Germany retain 11 positions in some functions, such as regulatory experts for Europe. The division employees 157 people in Limburgerhof, plus another 63 at facilities elsewhere in Europe. BASF said it would relocate 123 of those jobs to the North Carolina facility. The company plans to close its sites in Gatersleben, Germany, and in Svalöv, Sweden. The announcement will mean a reduction of 140 jobs in BASF’s European operations. The company said it aims to offer the affected employees other positions within the BASF wherever possible. “Our employees have done excellent work over the past years. We regret that we are losing these high-quality jobs in Germany and Sweden,” said Marcinowski.--------What do you think of BASF's decision to pull out ofthe European GM market? Does the move add further stagnation to innovation in the EU? Get in touch with us by emailing: nathan.gray<at>wrbm.com or tweeting @nathanrgray 
Switching to a diet rich in slowly digested carbohydrates could help to reduce markers of inflammation in overweight and obese people, say researchers.The study –published in the Journal of Nutrition – reports that diet rich in slowly digested carbohydrates, such as whole grains, legumes and other high-fibre foods, significantly reduces markers of inflammation associated with chronic disease. The research also suggests that such a diet increases levels of the hormone adiponectin, which helps to regulate the metabolism of fat and sugar.The randomised controlled study, involving 80 healthy men and women – half of normal weight and half overweight or obese – found that among the overweight and obese study participants the low-glycemic-load diet reduced an important biomarker of inflammation called C-reactive protein by about 22%."This finding is important and clinically useful since C-reactive protein is associated with an increased risk for many cancers as well as cardiovascular disease," said lead author Dr Marian Neuhouser, of the Public Health Sciences Division at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Centre, USA. "Lowering inflammatory factors is important for reducing a broad range of health risks,” she said.“Showing that a low-glycemic-load diet can improve health is important for the millions ... who are overweight or obese."Industry pressureIn recent years there has been pressure from consumer groups and government organisations for food manufacturers to reformulate products with healthier ingredients. As a result, there has been a growth in the number of products containing more slowly digested carbohydrates (low-glycemic-load) in place of flours and sugars that are digested faster.Research detailsIn the study, participants completed two 28-day feeding periods in a random order – one featuring high-glycemic-load (high-GL) carbohydrates, and the other featuring low-glycemic-load (low-GL) carbohydrates. The diets were identical in carbohydrate content, calories and macronutrients, noted the research team."Because the two diets differed only by glycemic load, we can infer that the changes we observed in important biomarkers were due to diet alone," explained Neuhouser.The team analysed blood taken from participants at the beginning and end of each feeding period, to look for changes in important biomarkers like; high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, serum amyloid A, Interleukin-6, leptin, and adiponectin. The team found that among people with high-body fat mass the low-GL diet significantly reduced C-reactive protein and marginally increased adiponectin (by around 5%)."The bottom line is that when it comes to reducing markers of chronic-disease risk, not all carbohydrates are created equal. Quality matters," said Neuhouser.  Source: Journal of Nutrition Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.3945/​jn.111.149807 “A Low-Glycemic Load Diet Reduces Serum C-Reactive Protein and Modestly Increases Adiponectin in Overweight and Obese Adults”Authors: M.L. Neuhouser, Y. Schwarz, C. Wang , K. Breymeyer, G. Coronado et al 
UK-based Premier Foods has announced that 5% of its 12,000 man workforce will be axed as the company sets larger cut targets.The company had said in October that it would need make £20m cuts by 2013 to focus on eight of its core brands following debt troubles.In a statement issued today, Premier said it now expects these cuts to double to £40m.“A series of cost saving programmes will be initiated throughout the year that will result in reductions in the workforce, mainly from overhead functions,” it said.“These reductions, which will be subject to appropriate consultations, are expected to amount to approximately 5% of the company’s current workforce of around 12,000 employees,” it continued.Premier will use the money from the 600 jobs lost to double the marketing spend for its eight power brands: Hovis, Ambrosia, Mr. Kipling, Sharwood’s, Loyd Grossman, Bisto, Oxo and Batchelors.It also plans TV ad campaigns for six of the brands.Company CEO Michael Clarke said: “While decisions to reduce the workforce are always difficult, I’m convinced we are taking the right steps in the long term interests of the business, employees and our stakeholders.” 
Israel-based flavours, botanicals and speciality ingredients player Frutarom has acquired 56% of Slovenian flavour company Etol for US$24.9m (€19.6m) and will bid for the full takeover in the coming weeks.Ori Yehudi, president and CEO of Frutarom, told FoodNavigator that it is a strategic acquisition that will harness Etol’s strengths in natural flavours as well as its presence across Eastern Europe.“Etol is an excellent company that has a very good performance and growth in its products and geography,” Yehudi said.Etol’s net worth was pegged at €28.9m (US$39.3m) at the end of September, 2011.“It is our first acquisition in Eastern Europe but we already have a strong position in the region, particularly in Russia, the Ukraine and Kazakstan,” he said, adding that this deal will boost Frutarom’s presence in areas such as Slovakia, Croatia and Slovenia where it is "not so strong.”He added that Slovenia is also well placed to access other markets.Natural flavour strengthsEtol, established in 1924, is focused on natural flavour products for the food and beverage industry, and is experienced in developing fruit based flavours and products, specialising in fruits local to Slovenia. The president said that Etol is extremely strong in the areas of natural flavours as well as fruit bases, and “we believe that we can leverage this to other markets.”He noted that the Slovenian company had a very good production site that has been heavily invested in particular on the technology side.Aggressive growth strategy2011 saw Frutarom acquire five European and American companies, and just two weeks ago it completed its €4.6m (US$5.8m) deal with British flavour and snack food company, Savoury Flavours.“The company focus is to grow rapidly but profitably,” Yehudi said, and “our goal is to reach $1bn in sales revenue in the next three to four years.”Frutarom reported a 21.9% growth in sales for the third quarter of 2011, with revenues at approximately US$135.3mn.The supplier is set to propose a full takeover bid for Etol in the coming weeks; Yehudi could not confirm the exact date, but he said that Slovenian law stipulates that it needs to be done within the next four weeks and that it will happen before then.When asked if the bid would be accepted, he said: “I believe so because there are not too many shareholders and it makes sense for both parties.”He added that the company has more acquisitions in the pipeline for 2012 with focus on markets such as Latin America, Mexico and Brazil where it hopes to build a stronger presence.“We will continue to grow… We believe that 2012 is a challenging year but there are a lot of positive signs from the acquisitions in 2011 and 2012 already,” he added.  
Industrial bread sales in Sweden, Denmark and Finland will decline in the next five years as a result of a low-carb trend and changing consumer habits, according to an analyst from Euromonitor.Pasi Hannonen, senior research analyst in Scandinavia for Euromonitor, spoke to BakeryAndSnacks.com last week about a growing preference for low-carb diets in Scandinavia.He said that this trend combined with the growing popularity of artisanal breads will impact industrial bread sales in the coming years.The changing landscape could mean some small companies go bust and large companies may need to make redundancies, he said.Low-carb“We have some part of the population which avoids bread because of the low-carb trend. Say, 6% of Finns maintain the diet and would therefore be eating less bread,” he said.Some firms, such as Finnish bakery Perheleipurit have introduced low-carb breads to seize on the trend and Hannonen expects more to follow suit.However, he emphasised that the low-carb trend would not affect all bakery sectors.“On the other hand, what apparently is also happening is that sales of pastries for example are not that much affected by the trend, as contradictory as it seems,” he said.Artisanal breadsAccording to Hannonen, segments of the population in Finland and Sweden are turning to premium bread from smaller bakeries and many are simply preferring to bake at home.DenmarkIn 2011, the retail value of the bread industry in Denmark stood at €864m (6.4bn DKR), according to data from Euromonitor. The current market is split almost equally between packaged industrial bread and unpackaged artisanal bread, while the market for bread substitutes is marginal.Euromonitor forecasts that the retail value for industrial packaged bread will fall 16.8% between 2011 and 2016, with consumers moving towards bread substitutes, which see a 27.3% climb.Hannonen said the industrial bread sales decline is Demark was less to do with the low-carb trend but more a result of intense competition.SwedenIn contrast, the low-carb diet in Sweden has been growing in popularity and impact bread sales, he said.The 2011 retail value of the bread market in Sweden according to Euromonitor was €1.1bn (9.9bn SEK) with industrial bread by far the most popular.Forecasts for the next five years see a fall in industrial bread sales of 2.8%, however Hannonen said that the forecast was made before the newest stage of the financial crisis started in early Autumn and a forecast made today might be even less optimistic.  
Ingredients firm Herza Chocnology has launched a range of bake-stable chocolate batons for baked goods that can be tailored to meet manufacturers’ precise size, shape and flavour requirements.Herza spokeswoman Irina Guschok told BakeryAndSnacks.com that to her knowledge Herza was the only firm to supply chocolate batons to meet such detailed customer requirements.CustomisationShe said that the manufacturers decide on the specific chocolate, adding that dark chocolate had been the most popular with Herza’s customers.The customer also decides on the size of the baton and can choose between 1 and 2cm wide and 8 to 40cm long.Marc van Essen, key account manager at Herza, said: “The size can be adjusted to the customer’s specifications, which means that the batons can be used quickly and simply on the existing plant. Such individual sizing is a unique service that only we offer in this form”He added that the flavours could also be tailored. “We are constantly creating new flavours, too. For example, the white batons can be made even more interesting with aromatic components like vanilla or coffee,” he said.According to Guschok, manufacturers would not need to alter any existing processes.The rangeHerza supplies the batons in bake-stable white chocolate, dark chocolate, whole milk and caramel-flavoured chocolate.It said the range was primarily for chocolate croissants and pain au chocolats.Guschok added that the company’s flavoured products were naturally flavoured and contained no additives.She was asked whether Herza’s product was any cheaper than similar offerings on the market, but said she could not provide such a comparison as she was not aware of competitors’ prices. The range is available worldwide and is supplied in 10 kg boxes up to any amount.LabellingAsked how manufacturers should label the batons, Guschok said: “The batons are labelled as any other chocolate. For dark chocolate that would be cocoa mass, cocoa butter, sugar and lecithin, for whole milk and white chocolate in addition sweet whey or whole milk powder and less/ no cocoa mass.”TemperaturesShe said that the temperature the batons can withstand depends on the mass. “Dark chocolate can withstand temperatures up to 150ºC (core temperature of the bakery product) and whole milk/ white chocolate up to 70ºC” she said. 
Frozen food could help to slash food waste, claimed the British Frozen Food FederationPutting more frozen food on UK dinner plates could help slash household food waste, according to the British Frozen Food Federation (BFFF).BFFF’s comments follow the latest household food and drink report from the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs.Its research The Household Food and Drink Waste linked to Food and Drink Purchases showed that consumers binned 5.3Mt of avoidable waste.Brian Young, BFFF director general, said: “When millions of people in the world go to bed hungry every night, it’s shocking to see that almost a fifth of food purchased is destined for the rubbish bin. If more consumers opted for frozen, there would be virtually zero waste from products perishing in the cupboard or fridge.”Binned bread accounts for 32% of the total waste while potatoes and vegetables account for 24%. Discarded meat and fish accounts for 13% of the total. Peak condition“Frozen products can have shelflives of around 12 months or more depending on the product and will remain in peak condition for the duration of this when stored correctly,” said Young. “Fast and organised harvest and slaughter to freeze methods ensure that nutrients and quality is locked in.” Young added: “While the cost of living continues to rise, it makes no sense to throw money away on produce that will not be consumed. Choosing frozen food can help families and individuals take control of their budgets and eat nutritious food year round. It is unsustainable and morally wrong to keep throwing away fresh food. “We must be intelligent in our food choices, using frozen wherever possible, to make sure that money spent at the supermarket translates to food in our tummies not food in the bin.”Earlier this month BFFF confirmed that celebrity endorsements by TV chefs such as Jamie Oliver plus consumers’ perception of high-value and low-waste helped the UK frozen food sector grow by 5.2% to reach sales of £5.36bn last year.  
An extension of its FroZen Viniflora range of malolactic starter cultures range for smaller scale red wine makers is set to revolutionise production through the faster rate of fermentation, claims Denmark based Chr. Hansen.Laurent Hubert, marketing director, wine cultures at Chr. Hansen told FoodNavigator.com that its new Viniflora Freasy CH16 range will secure speed, and consistency in production, alongside the absence of downgrades and off-flavours by other microorganisms, while preventing the development of biogenic amines such as histamine during malolactic fermentation for smaller wine producers. Nearly 10% of the global wine production of 2.30 billion liters is today inoculated with malolactic cultures, said the Danish supplier.  Malolactic fermentation, a process where lactic acid bacteria convert sharp-tasting malic acid into the softer-tasting lactic acid, is used by wine makers to cut the acid in red wines, and some white wines, particularly those aged in oak, by organic rather than chemical means. A wine high in malic acid is naturally more acidic, consequently, the greater the reduction the smoother the wine. Previously the FroZen Viniflora technology, said Hubert, was only available to large scale wineries as the cultures are delivered at -50C and stored at -50C. And, generally, only the bigger producers would have the necessary scale to warrant purchasing a -50C freezer, he explained.“By developing a product delivered at -50C and storable at -18C we are opening this FroZen technology to all wineries and winemakers,” added Hubert.The new range of cultures is suitable for reds such as Cabernet-Sauvignon, Merlot, Shiraz, Tempranillo, Sangiovese, and Primitivo. Hubert said the Freasy cultures are set to shave off energy-consuming time during the malolactic fermentation process for high pH, high alcohol red wines.“With CH16, malolactic fermentation can be managed in 10 to 20 days depending on the temperature. This is a huge difference compare to a 'spontaneous malolactic fermentation' that can take 2 to 3 months,” he added. The range was tested over a two year period in South Africa and France with the trials, said Hubert, showing that a standard -18°C freezer is good enough to keep all the good features of these frozen cultures which is a huge advantage to small and medium sized wineries.“Performances where similar to the product stored at -50C; we only had a difference after 12 weeks. This gives enough time to winemakers to store the product in their freezer until its day of use,” said the Chr. Hansen wine specialist. Currently targeting small scale winemakers in South Africa and Australia, Chr. Hansen said the cultures will be available for the European market around August this year.  
Researchers have again suggested a link between the consumption of processed meats and cancer. Scientists from Sweden claim that consumption of manufactured meat is associated with an increased risk of pancreatic cancer.The study – published in the British Journal of Cancer – investigates possible links between meat consumption and pancreatic cancer by analysing data from more than two million people in previous studies in a meta-analysis. The results of the investigation suggest that processed meat consumption is linked to pancreatic cancer risk – with an extra 50 grams of processed meat a day increasing the risk of pancreatic cancer risk by 19% - while red meat consumption is associated with an increased risk of pancreatic cancer in men only. The research team, lead by Professor Susanna Larsson of the Karolinska Institute, warned that whilst the risk of pancreatic cancer was increased, the fact that it is rare disease means that a person’s lifetime risk of pancreatic cancer is still very small – even with a 19% increase in risk.“This meta-analysis showed a statistically significant positive association between processed meat consumption and risk of pancreatic cancer,” reported the researchers.“Red meat consumption was not associated with risk of pancreatic cancer overall, but was positively associated with risk in men,” they added.The team also said that further research, in the form of large prospective studies “with better adjustment for potential confounders” are needed to establish any potential association between red and processed meat consumption and pancreatic cancer risk. Red meat and cancerLots of attention – and headlines – have already been dedicated to the health risks said to be associated with consumption of red meat.High consumption has been associated with many poor health outcomes , including diabetes , cardiovascular disease , and several types of cancer (including lung and colorectal , prostate , and bladder )In 2007 the World Cancer Research Fund (WCRF) published a report that directly linked diet to cancer, reporting that red and processed meats posing particular risks. However, analysis of data from over a half million people in Europe, as part of the EPIC study, recently found no association between dietary intakes of red meat and the risk of bladder cancer (EPIC study previously reported here ).Last year a second report from the WCRF (reported here ) ‘confirmed’ that red and processed meats increase risk of bowel cancer and recommended limiting red meat consumption and completely avoiding processed meats. Research detailsThe new systematic review combined the results of 11 studies that investigated associations between red and processed meat consumption and the risk of pancreatic cancer. The studies featured over 2 million participants in total, and all assessed participants’ food consumption and whether this was later linked to pancreatic cancer development.Larsson and her team noted that all 11 studies examined the link between red meat and the cancer – with none finding a significant association between the two. However, when separated and analysed for men and women, the researchers found a link between red meat consumption and pancreatic cancer in men, they said.In addition, the team reported that analysis of the seven studies examining the association between processed meat consumption and pancreatic cancer, revealed an overall increase in risk of the cancer in line with increased processed meat intake. They said that consumption of 50g a day was associated with a 19% increased risk. Source: British Journal of Cancer Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.585 “Red and processed meat consumption and risk of pancreatic cancer: meta-analysis of prospective studies”Authors: S.C. Larsson, A. Wolk 
Swiss chocolatier Lindt has recorded sales below market expectations and could be subject to a takeover from Nestle, according to an analyst from Kepler Capital Markets.Lindt released its 2011 sales report today in which it reported organic sales growth of 6%The company achieved annual sales of €2.05bn (CHF 2.49bn) in 2011. In 2010 its sales were slightly higher at €2.12 (CHF 2.57bn).Below expectationsJon Cox, head of European food and beverage research at Kepler told ConfectioneryNews.com: “The sales were solid enough but the market had expected an acceleration in organic growth in H2 [second half of the financial year] - so that was a bit disappointing.” According to a statement from the company its strategic target had been met and it reported its highest market share in the company's history in the pralinés segment.However, the company complained of a massive negative currency influence of 9.5%Nestle takeover on the cards?Between 2010 and 2011, Cox had told this site that Lindt could be the subject to a takeover with Nestle and Asian confectioner Lotte the likeliest candidates. “Ultimately I still believe Lindt is a takeover target with Nestle the most likely acquirer - but that could be some years away,” he said today.Outlook for 2012According to Cox, the US market will be the biggest growth driver for Lindt going into 2012.The company reported strong growth in the US, France, Germany and the energy Chinese market. However, adverse weather and economic conditions stunted growth in Italy, Spain and Australia.“The positive development of Lindt in Hong Kong, is very pleasing and builds a sound foundation for the further development of the Chinese market, which will be pushed henceforth in the context of the geographical expansion of the Group,” said the company.Cox added: “I expect a solid year from supply side perspective - cocoa prices, and other commodities, are falling while the dollar has strengthened,” he said.“However, the demand side is the big question - I presume slow Easter business given economic mood but a better second half,” he continued.The company said it expects good operating profit going forward with a margin increases within 20 to 40 basis points. 
Soy milk can act as an egg yolk substitute in low-cholesterol low-fat mayonnaise, finds new research from Iran. Writing in the journal Food Hydrocolloids, the authors said that they developed a formulation for egg-free mayonnaise based on a soy milk interaction with gums and emulsifiers to formulate a mayonnaise with similar characteristics to full fat mayonnaise.Soy milk offers an alternative protein source to the egg yolk and also has emulsifying properties, added the authors, who are based at the Department of Food Science and Technology at the Ferdowsi University of Mashhad. “Results revealed that the best mixture was the formulation containing 6.7% mono- & diglycerides, 36.7% guar gum and 56.7% xanthan gum,” said the food scientists.Among mayonnaise ingredients, egg yolk is most critical for the stability of the product but one main problem with egg yolk is its high cholesterol content, and the researchers note various attempts by industry to develop low-cholesterol sauces with similar characteristics to real mayonnaise.Vegetable protein isolates, note the authors, can be used effectively as food emulsion stabilizers because of their capacity to lower the interfacial tension between hydrophobic and hydrophilic components. “Several vegetable proteins from soy, sunflower, pea, tomato seed, wheat, white lupin and faba bean have been successfully tested to stabilize oil-in-water (o/w) emulsions,” they explained. The food scientists indicated their research was prompted by a gap in the literature in terms of earlier studies on the use of soy milk with gums and emulsifiers to completely replace egg yolk and reduce cholesterol and fat in mayonnaiseThe authors said the mayonnaise samples for the study were prepared using a standard mixer and they contained soy milk, sunflower oil, vinegar (5% (w/v) acetic acid), salt, mustard powder, sugar, stabilizers, emulsifiers and water. Results They found that their low-fat mayonnaise samples showed a high stability and said this was as a result of the increased viscosity of the aqueous phase, “mainly due to adding the xanthan and guar gums to the soy milk that consequently slowed down oil droplets movement.”“High xanthan gum levels gave low-fat mayonnaise products with more firmness, adhesiveness, and adhesive force values compared to products with no-added xanthan gum.,” said the team.However, they found that the mayonnaise sample with xanthan gum did not receive high sensory scores. “Therefore, it should be used as a mixture with guar gum to improve sensory properties when optimum combination levels of gums are taken into account.” The team said they also observed that the low-fat mayonnaises containing only mono- & diglycerides or samples with high levels of this emulsifier; did not perform well in terms of all measured parameters including stability, rheological characteristics, textural properties. Source: Food Hydrocolloids Published online ahead of print: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2011.12.023 Title: Optimization of low cholesterol-low fat mayonnaise formulation: Effect of using soy milk and some stabilizer by a mixture design approachAuthors: V. Nikzade, M. Mazaheri Tehrani, M. Saadatmand-Tarzjan  
Scientists claim to have discovered a fatty taste receptor in humans, which could make people more or less sensitive to the fat content of food and influence food preference, according to a new study published in the Journal of Lipid Research.Researchers from the Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis claim they have identified a variant of a gene called CD36, which is connected to the taste buds, and could mean that fat is sensed in the mouth in a similar way to other tastes – salt, sour, bitter, sweet, and umami. As many as one in five people may have a variant of the gene that makes less of an associated fat-sensitive protein, meaning that they could be less sensitive to the fat content of food.They claim that this is the first time CD36 has been linked to fatty taste perception in humans, when traditionally fat perception was thought to be nearly entirely dependent on textural and aromatic cues. “The ultimate goal is to understand how our perception of fat in food might influence what foods we eat and the quantities of fat that we consume,” said senior researcher Dr. Nada Abumrad of the Washington University School of Medicine. “In this study, we’ve found one potential reason for individual variability in how people sense fat.”The researchers asked 21 obese subjects to taste the odd one out from three different solutions, one of which contained fat, and two others that were fat-free but similar in texture.“This issue is particularly important in obesity, because obese subjects prefer foods with higher fat content and crave more high fat foods as compared with lean subjects,” the authors wrote.They found that study subjects who made more of a CD36 protein were eight times more sensitive to fat content than those who made 50% as much of the protein.Abumrad said that further research was necessary to determine whether ability to detect fat influences fat intake. “It may be, as was shown recently, that as people consume more fat, they become less sensitive to it, requiring more intake for the same satisfaction,” Abumrad said.Previous research in mice and rats has suggested that rodents without the CD36 gene no longer have a preference for fatty foods, and it may also play a role in their ability to digest fat properly.Lead author Dr. M. Yanina Pepino said: “Diet can affect sensitivity to fat, and in animals, diet also influences the amount of CD36 that’s made. If we follow the results in animals, a high-fat diet would lead to less production of CD36, and that, in turn, could make a person less sensitive to fat. From our results in this study, we would hypothesize that people with obesity may make less of the CD36 protein. So it would seem logical that the amounts of the protein we make can be modified, both by a person’s genetics and by the diet they eat.”Source: Journal of Lipid Research“The fatty acid translocase gene, CD36, and lingual lipase influence oral sensitivity to fat in obese subjects” Authors: Marta Yanina Pepino, Latisha Love-Gregory, Samuel Klein and Nada A. Abumrad 
Five segments of the Spanish sweets market have come together to form the new Spanish Confectionery Association (PRODULCE).The group replaces Federation of Spanish Confectionery Associations (FEAD).The GoalThe new association said in a statement: “PRODULCE is founded in a reassessment of the old FEAD from which we seek to renew bonds and create a new path that leads us to a greater representation in the food industry.”“The main objectives are to represent and protect the common interests of the confectionery sector and to position the Association as a reference for entities to which we are related, to advertise to opinion leaders and consumers the commitment and responsibility of our industry, besides of the improvement efforts in terms of innovation, food safety and nutrition.”The organisation will be made up of 62 companies in the chewing gum, turron, marzipan, sweets and biscuit industries.The companies together represent 85% of the Spanish confectionery market.The group will become a member of the Spanish Food and Drink Association (FIAB) at national level and will join CAOBISCO on the European stage.The presidentOlga Martínez, communications and public affairs manager at Wrigley has taken the helm as the new association’s President.“Joining the efforts of a range of different partners in the same sector will allow us to convey most effectively the values and strengths of an industry that provides jobs to more than 115,000 people and represents the 19% of the growth in food and beverage business in Spain,” she said.Martínez has worked for Wrigley for the past few years after previously holding acting as Southern Europe communications manager for United Biscuits between 2003 and 2007.The marketSpain is the fifth largest confectionery producer in the EU behind Germany, the UK, France and Italy.Confectionery is the seventh largest category within the Spanish food and drink sector, a market that employs around 445,475 people. 
 FrieslandCampina cautioned on use of healthy food stampDutch dairy manufacturer FrieslandCampina has been cautioned about the use of a healthy foods logo from packs of its reduced fat ham and cheese. The logo, introduced last year, in a joint initiative by Stichting Ik Kies Bewust (the Dutch affiliate of the Choices International Foundation) and the Albert Heijn retail chain, is aimed at enabling consumers to make healthy selections more easily and rapidly, but is also aimed at encouraging supermarkets and manufacturers to further improve their products. Jan-Willem ter Avest, a spokesperson for FrieslandCampina, told FoodNavigator.com that its Slankie brand of spreadable cheese with lean ham contains a small amount of added sugar - 0,05 grams per cup. He said that the company does not add in the sugar to the final product but the sugar is present due to the way the Dutch group’s supplier processes the meat. “But strictly speaking, the product no longer meets the requirements of the ‘Ik Kies Bewust’ logo,” said the FrieslandCampina spokesperson. The dairy group, he said, is currently in consultation with the Foundation in regards to the appropriate action.The FrieslandCampina spokesperson said consumer advocates Foodwatch drew the attention of the dairy company to the 'added sugar' aspect of the ham. "It was not clear to us until then that the sugar is added to the meat due to the way the supplier processes it."“FrieslandCampina maintains its position that Slankie 20+ Mager Ham is part of a sound diet,” said ter Avest, who stressed that all other Slankie spreadable cheeses are in compliance with the requirements of the Stichting Ik Kies Bewust standard.Léon Jansen, a spokesperson for the Choices International Foundation, said the organisation saw the disqualification of the FreislandCampina product as a stimulus to improve the regulations of the foundation. "For products with the logo in the product group of cheese, no sugar may be added. In this case a very small amount of sugar is added to the cheese because it is used as a technical substance in the production of ham. The amount of this added sugar is many times lower compared to the naturally sugar present from milk," notes Jansen.He also points out that, from a nutrition perspective, the sugar from the ham in the cheese "is not relevant". "However our criteria for cheese do not define a maximum of this carryover of added sugar to cheese. Therefore I will ask the scientific committee to come forward with a regulation concerning the maximum quantities of carryover of these kind of nutrients," added Jansen. Independently assessed criteria Two versions of the Dutch logo exist. A green stamp (pictured) represents the healthy choice within a category of basic products like bread, milk, fruit and vegetables. A blue stamp is for healthier options within non-basic categories like snacks, soups and sauces.The logo does not relate to health claims for added health benefits, but for nutrition claims relating to energy (calorific value), nutrient content and reduced/increased levels of nutrients. Its criteria were drawn up by an independent scientific committee and are in line with the Official Dutch Guidelines for Food Choice published by The Netherlands Food Centre. The stamp is a merger of two previous healthy foods logo schemes - the Dutch version of the Choices logo and retailer Albert Heijn’s clover logo, with Stichting Ik Kies Bewust and the retail chain spending two years developing the common healthier foods standard for products that are below threshold levels of sugar, salt and saturated fat.A spokesperson for Albert Heijn told this publication at the time of the new logo’s launch last March that the development process was challenging as both groups were using different criteria for determining what constitutes a healthy product in the various food categories.  
Robert Wiseman Dairies says it has agreed the terms of a £279.5m takeover deal by Müller UK (a wholly owned subsidiary of the German dairy giant) and is recommending the offer unanimously to shareholders.Last Friday, Wiseman, based in East Kilbride, Scotland, announced it was in talks with Müller following a sharp spike in its share price (332.5p) as we went to press that day, up from 244p at Thursday’s close, now 388.79p).Welcoming news of a concrete offer this morning, executive chairman Robert Wiseman (pictured) said: "The combination of Müller and Wiseman makes strong commercial and strategic sense, creating a leading integrated dairy business in the UK with complementary positions in the yoghurt and potted desserts market and the fresh milk market."He added:“Müller's [390p/share] offer represents an attractive price for an outstanding business and Müller recognises the importance of Wiseman's management (who will continue to lead the business alongside Müller), employees and our best-in-class assets. “These factors have contributed to the Board's recommendation of this transaction. I very much look forward to playing a part in the next chapter of Wiseman's development,” Wiseman said.Heiner Kamps, CEO, Müller said: "This is an exciting strategic move by Müller to enter a new market segment in the UK. The combination of these complementary businesses will form a leading dairy player offering a range of exceptional products to our customers across the UK. This will create significant opportunities which will benefit suppliers, customers, consumers and employees."Analysts hail 'class act'In a note this morning, Shore Capital analysts Clive Black and Darren Shirley noted that Muller held the number two and three market positions in UK yogurts (Muller Corner, Muller Light trail only Danone brand Activia)."Whilst deals are never done done until they're done, with well over 50% acceptances [54.5% reported] we believe Muller is in a very good place to gain control," they wrote.Black and Shirley said they thought Wiseman shareholders would welcome a cash offer given the firm's under-performance over the last year, mainly due to intense supermarket price competition since summer 2010, input price pressure for milk and rising packaging and distribution costs due to high oil prices.The analysts said they believed that Wiseman was the UK's leading liquid milk suppplier, a "very well-invested and operated business", with, they added, the strongest network of well-invested dairies in England and leading overall service levels in the industry.As for what Muller saw in Wiseman, Black and Shirley said, it was a matter for the German firm's directors. "Albeit we foresee the greatest potential benefits...in milk procurement, collection and utilisation, plus the saving of the annual circa. £12.5m [€15.1m] cash dividend payout."Stickier UK wicket for Müller?Commenting on news of the talks last week, Julian Wild, a corporate finance partner at UK law firm Rollits, told DairyReporter.com that he was surprised, especially after he scotched talks of an approach by Müller for Dairy Crest  last year along similar lines.Wild said: "My view is that I think Müller hit a stickier patch in the UK, and I don't think their performance in the UK has been quite as strong, and they've certainly had some changes of management. So it's certainly understandable that they're looking at other ways to grow their business.He added: "I'm not surprised on the one hand that Müller might be looking at different ways to diversify their business within dairy. But I have to say that I'm tremendously surprised that they'd want to enter the liquid milk market, which is hugely competitive."There are only really the three major players, in Dairy Crest, Arla and Wiseman, and they are all having to invest in new dairies, they're all taking business from each other. It's just massively price competitive, and quite why Müller thinks that's an attractive market to be in, I have to say I struggle to see at the moment.However, Wild said he wasn't totally surprised that the management at Wiseman (the Wiseman family) might be keen to exit, because"they're at the stage when they may be looking at succession".Leverage brand recognition?But with companies such as Arla and Wiseman diversifying into lactose free and other higher-margin products, did Wild think that Müller perhaps saw scope to develop new offerings for consumers and leverage on the brand recognition provided by a major UK dairy processor?Wild said: "I wouldn't say that the Wiseman name or any of the other UK milk producers would be well-known to the consumers, because the market is almost entirely private label. Ask the average consumer who produces milk for major retailers, and I don't think they'd have a clue. So I don't think there's a great deal in the brands at all, because it is a private label market.He added: "There are some quite interesting innovations coming through, like the one you just mentioned. Clearly there are people with lactose intolerance, and doubtless there is a market along free-from lines. But it's not that big compared to the vast bulk of the liquid milk market.""I just do not see that that is going to change. Milk has always been used as a loss leader by the major retailers, and they will remain very, very competitive, because that's probably the one product that consumers know how much it costs." 
There are no health risks from the use of aspartame and other low-and-no calorie sweeteners, claimed a gathering of Italian and European food safety, health and nutrition experts this week. A conference at the head offices of the Italian ministry for health on Wednesday - No-Calorie Intense Sweeteners – Focus on Safety of Use - saw the scientists conclude that sweeteners currently available on the market are “safe for consumption”.Vittorio Silano, chair of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA)’s scientific committee, was one of the participants at the event.Speaking at the event, Andrea Poli, scientific director of Nutrition Foundation of Italy (NFI), said: "Recent years have seen the dissemination of contradictory information about the alleged health risks arising from the consumption of some low- and no- calorie sweeteners such as aspartame. This information is generally contrary to the prevailing opinion of the scientific community. At today's conference…. top-tier experts said that there is no longer room for doubt about the safety of these substances, which have been thoroughly evaluated and approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities." Marina Marinovich, president of the Italian Society of Toxicology, and a conference participant said: "All food additives are subjected to broad-ranging and in-depth testing before they obtain approval, and low- and no- calorie sweeteners are no exception. The studies questioning the safety of these substances have generally been based on parameters that do not comply with commonly accepted methods, and must therefore be deemed inadmissible from a scientific perspective." Meanwhile, John Christian Larsen, chief consultant in toxicology and risk assessment at the National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark noted that “debate and communication like today's conference are important, as they aim to clarify many "false alarms" on low- and no- calorie sweeteners' safety launched in the past." EFSA review April this year saw the European Parliament’s Environment committee pushing for a warning label on products containing aspartame stating that they may not be suitable for pregnant women. On the back of the MEPs’ concerns and on a request for a thorough literature review, a re-assessment of the safety of aspartame is now underway at EFSA, bringing forward a scheduled re-evaluation of aspartame from 2020 to 2012.EFSA recently told FoodNavigator.com that it asked the regulator for an extension of the review period until the end of September 2012 to allow enough time for the agency to conduct a full risk assessment of the sweetener “in view of the fact that a public call for data had to be conducted first.”In response to the call for data, the Parma-based risk assessor said it has received more than 600 studies, including the 112 studies that supported the original application. “We intend to put the draft opinion to a public consultation sometime in either spring or summer 2012,” added the agency.Pregnancy label warningIn November scientists attached to the Réseau Environnement Santé (RES) in France urged the French Minister of Health to inform women about the dangers of aspartame during pregnancy. Paris-based (RES) - Environmental Health Network - said it was taking advantage of the celebration of World Day for Prematurity to communicate to Minister Xavier Bertrand their concerns over the intake of aspartame during pregnancy, citing studies associating the sweetener with increased risk for preterm births.RES argues that the prevention of all early and late prematurity should be a priority for the ministry and stressed the need to inform pregnant women about all risk factors.As evidence for their concerns, the French campaigners reference a study published last year in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition which found that pregnant Danish women who consumed at least four servings of artificially sweetened carbonated soft drinks per day were at a 78% higher risk of preterm birth than women who did not consume any soft drinks.  
Industry should put effort into increasing awareness of organic logos because “very few” consumers trust generic labels with the prefix ‘organic’, say researchers.The study – published in Food Quality and Preference  – suggests that manufacturers and associations that use, or own, organic labelling schemes should put effort into measures that increase consumer awareness of the logo.“According to our results, very few consumers trusted the generic labelling with the prefix ‘organic’ without a certification logo,” explained the research team, led by Dr Meike Janssen, University of Kassel, Germany.“For almost all tested organic certification logos, the willingness-to-pay was significantly higher than for the generic labelling ... That even holds true for a fake logo investigated in Switzerland,” explained Janssen and her colleagues.They said that forming consumer perceptions and attitudes regarding an underlying scheme – in terms of standards and control regime – is a key driver. “These findings can be used by organic producers and processors for choosing an organic labelling scheme as well as distribution channel for their products,” said Janssen, noting that “retailers can use the information likewise.”Organic tradingTrust is a delicate matter in the organic food market, as consumers are generally not able to validate whether a product is organic. “In information economics, product attributes like these are called credence attributes,” explained the researchers.“Unlike search attributes (e.g. price, colour) and experience attributes (e.g. taste, durability) which consumers can evaluate prior and after consumption respectively, credence attributes involve a high level of uncertainty from the consumer perspective,” they said.As a result, consumer trust in the integrity of credence goods is of crucial importance, said Janssen and her team – who argued that this is particularly true if the credence attribute entails a price premium, as is the case with organic food. Research findingsAs part of the new study, Janssen and her colleagues conducted several ‘choice experiments’ and a total of 2,411 structured interviews with consumers of organic food in six European countries. Preferences and willingness-to-pay (WTP) for different organic logos were analysed. They found great differences between countries as to which kind of organic logo was preferred by consumers. In Denmark and the Czech Republic, for example, they found that consumers are willing to pay the highest price premium for the governmental logo – whilst in Italy the old EU logo reached the highest WTP. In Germany, a high WTP was recorded for the logo of the farmers’ association Demeter and the governmental logo. However, in Switzerland, the logo of the farmers’ umbrella organisation Bio Suisse “was clearly preferred,” said the team. Willingness-to-pay in the UK was highest for the logos of the Soil Association and the certification body ‘Organic Farmers & Growers’, they found. “It is advisable to label organic products with well-known organic certification logos that consumers trust,” concluded Janssen and her colleagues. They argued that organisations who own an organic labelling scheme “should put effort into measures for increasing consumer awareness of the logo and forming consumer perceptions and attitudes regarding the underlying scheme in terms of standards.” EU logoJanssen and her team noted that – at the time of writing – “it remains to be seen how quickly the new mandatory EU logo will gain consumer awareness in the population.” However, they argued that it is likely to take time until the new logo is widely trusted in countries where the former voluntary EU logo was not very common. “In these countries, it thus seems advisable to additionally label organic products with an organic logo that consumers know and trust, at least in a transition period,” said Janssen and her colleagues.  Source: Food Quality and Preference Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1016/j.foodqual.2011.12.004 “Product labelling in the market for organic food: Consumer preferences and willingness-to-pay for different organic certification logos”Authors: M. Janssen, U. Hamm 
Carr’s Milling Industries has reported solid Q1 results in a trading update as improved flour sales driven by new customers led to results that have surprised market analysts. Analysts from Shore Capital described the trading update for the 18-week period leading up to 7 January as “positive”. Carr’s, which works in flour milling, engineering and agriculture industries, gave the update in the wake of its AGM, which was held on Tuesday.Customer gainsThe company said that for the food arm of its business: “Flour sales volumes were slightly ahead, reflecting the gains of new customers.” “However, overall margins continue to be low as the result of competition in an industry with significant surplus capacity. The benefits of our investment in the port at Kirkcaldy, including the improved supply of quality wheat, have been as expected.”The company made a £0.8m (€0.96m) investment in a re-opened port at Kirkcaldy in 2011 which is said to have boosted its wheat supply.Analyst’s takeShore Capital analysts said: “Flour sales volumes are reportedly up year-on-year, albeit only slightly, but this was still a positive surprise for us. “However, management still warns of on-going competition in the industry as a result of overcapacity, which is likely to constrain margins. The division does, however, continue to benefit from its investment in the port of Kirkcaldy which, in particular, is delivering an improved supply of quality wheat.”ForecastsFollowing the trading update, Shore Capital has upgraded its current year EPS forecast by 3%. “This provides year-on-year growth of 10%, which, given the current valuation, we deem to be an attractive investment opportunity,” it said.Carr’s turnover for 2011 stood at £373.3m (€446.8m). Shore Capital forecasts that this figure will rise 11% in 2012, with further increases in 2013. 
UK-based vegetable crisp manufacturer Tyrells has acquired fellow UK veg crisp maker Glennans for an undisclosed sum.Tyrrells said in a statement to BakeryAndSnacks.com: “The Glennans brand focusses on creating very high quality vegetable crisps and as such will be a very complimentary addition to the Tyrrells brand.”  “Tyrrells is committed to the development of both brands and is looking forward to realising the combined growth potential in the future.”A Tyrells spokesperson said that the Glennans brand would continue and Tyrells would look to move its new brand into new markets, predominantly in the UK.Tyrrells has acquired Glennans’ £3.5m (€4.1m) factory in Staffordshire built in 2005 as a result of the deal.Growth plansOliver Rudgard, director at Tyrrells, said: “We have plans to significantly grow both the Tyrrells and Glennans brands.”A Tyrrells spokesperson said these plans were UK-focussed.Glennans has only one production site, but its products are also distributed in Europe and the Middle East. Some of its distributors include Bos Food in Germany, Xup Xup in Spain and others in Ireland, UAE, Ireland, Scandinavia and the Netherlands. However, export markets are mostly in the food service sector.The brand also has a presence in France, Russia, Japan, US, Canada and most recently ChinaGlennansGlennans is a family run business that was created in 1985. The Glennans brand was launched in to the retail sector in 2004.The company has 100g and 20g bags for the retail sector in three flavours: crunchy vegetable crisps, peppered parsnip crisps, and sweet potato & plantain crisps.In the UK, The 100g range is available in all Makro stores and the 20g in Waitrose and travel retail.The company’s managing director David Glennan will remain in the business following the deal. 
The European Union should put the brakes on any mooted changes to rules governing milks targeting 1-3 year olds until a scientific review can be conducted, according to the EU group that represents infant food makers.With the controversial category under discussion at European Commission and European Council committees and working groups, Roger Clarke, of the European Dietetic Food Industry Association (IDACE), said an objective review of the science and benefits of the products was required before any real progress could be made.Clarke called on the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) to perform such a review and praised his industry’s openness on a sensitive and highly politicised issue where milk-based drinks for children produced by his group’s members are often vilified by breast milk and natural milk advocates such as Baby Milk Action (BMA) in the UK on safety or efficacy grounds.“We have been very transparent about this,” Clarke told NutraIngredients this morning. “There are paediatricians who say that the jury is out on which products are the best for children between 12 and 36 months.”“The safety of these products is not in doubt. These products are perfectly safe for infants aged 12 to 36 months: The question is- whether or not these products are necessary for this age group. A comprehensive EFSA review should consider this point, in addition to what the implications would be if these products would be moved to general food legislation - and hence subject to adult limits for heavy metal content, etc.""If the European Parliament is not sure about these issues, decisions should be deferred until a review can be carried out. The EC would not be averse to demanding such a review.”Whether that will occur, or how long it might take, was anybody’s guess, Clarke said.Only then may Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) like Swedish Green Carl Schylter, who sat on a PARNUTS ENVI (Environment, Public Health and Food Safety) committee, be better placed to change a current view that children’s milks are, “an absurd concept...it is cows’ milk with additives”.Groups like BMA and the International Baby Food Action Network (IBFAN) would be similarly interested in such a review which industry would like to see validate its assertion that the addition of nutrients like vitamin D to milks aimed at 1-3 year olds can boost bone development, as one example.Category critics point to a review of the category conducted by the German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR) last year. At the time BfR president, Dr Andreas Hensel said: "From a nutritional and physiological point of view these special toddler milks are not necessary.”Typically the milks contain additional vitamins, minerals and fatty acids and reduced protein (to battle childhood overweight and obesity).PARNUTS reformAny potential changes are part of broader amendments to the EU PARNUTS (Foods for particular nutritional purposes) Directive that has governed specialty foods like infant drinks and foods in the EU since 1977, and Clarke said ‘children’s milk’ was just one of 60 or 70 potential areas of regulatory reform that deserved equal attention.Other equally important issues include how gluten-free foods, sports foods, slimming foods, and foods for sick infants will be regulated in the wake of the dismantling of PARNUTS.It is likely sports and slimming foods will be required to validate their claims under the nutrition and health claims regulation (NHCR), and Clarke said children’s milks may have to submit dossiers to back claims too.“This is as it should be. Let EFSA decide if the scientific justification is there,” Clarke said, adding IDACE, and the British Specialist Nutrition Association he is director general of, would prefer to see the category regulated under new “complementary foods” rules being drawn up, rather than infant formula and follow-on formula directives that prevent almost all marketing in the EU.“But we are not concerned about this and are happy to submit to whatever regulation is deemed relevant,” he said. 
Bakery manufacturers can capitalise on an emerging Scandinavian dietary trend with new low-carb offerings, according to an analyst from Euromonitor International.Pasi Hannonen, senior research analyst in Scandinavia for Euromonitor, spoke to BakeryAndSnacks.com about a growing preference for the low-carbohydrate high fat diet (LCHF) in Scandinavia that emerged following a butter shortage in late 2011. Who can profit?Hannonen said it would be domestic bakery firms that could profit most from this trend, and the only real prospect for large multinational to profit was through the acquisition of a local business.“They might have a chance, but transportation and brand name make it hard for them to get involved,” he said.Authorities in Scandinavia continue to promote a more traditional diet as a posed to one low in carbohydrates causing some experts to view the low carb preference as mere passing trend.However, according to Hannonen, it could be worth manufacturers while to test the market with low-carb bakery offerings.He said that competition was currently low and production could always be stopped if a trial proved unsuccessful.He gave the example of Finnish bakery Perheleipurit which launched a low-carb bread called Karppinen in June last year called Karppinen, a play on the Finnish word for the low-carb diet (Karppaus).Sales had reportedly exceeded a million units by October 2011, making it a unique success, he said.Low-carb market playersThere are currently few domestic players in Scandinavia that have launch low-carb bakery products.In Sweden, where the trend originated, Hannonen said there was only a very small company called CarbZone that produces low-carb bakery products and its market share was very marginal.Perheleipurit is probably the largest low-carb bread maker in Finland, according to Hannonen, followed closely by Vaasan a larger player in the overall market that launched a mini-carbohydrate bread in response to Perheleipurit success.Hannonen expects others to serve up low-carb offerings in the near future. “Fazer has the capacity to do this well. I wouldn’t be surprised if this company does go into this market,” he said.Meanwhile in Norway, where the trend is slightly weaker, market leader Bakers dipped its toes in the market with the low-carb bread launch Ingers Lavkarbobrød in October. Origins of the trendHannonen explained that the low-carb dietary trend had started in Sweden a few years ago and spread later to Norway and Finland.He said the trend was strongest in Sweden and Finland and had received media attention throughout 2011 after people began reading opinions from alternative experts on what foods should be avoided.He added that the trend had never quite taken off in Demark.Beyond EuropeAccording to Hannonen the low carb trend is exclusive to Scandinavia.In Baltic countries there is a preference for all natural products, but a low-carb trend is nowhere near as visible as in Scandinavia, he said. 
The value of Irish food and drink exports has increased by €1 billion, representing a 12% surge in 2011 and driving the country’s overall export revenue, according to Irish food board.Figures released today by Ireland’s food board, Bord Bia, pegged total food and drink exports for 2011 at €8.85 billion.This strong growth has been boosted by a positive balance in key categories for supply and demand, global prices for major commodities, reduced volatility in exchange rates as well as a tentative shift to price inflation across most major European markets, the board noted.Paul Kelly, director of industry body Food and Drink Industry Ireland (FDII) welcomed the “record food and drink export figures”.“This reflects the export orientation of the Irish industry which is focused on the customer, innovation and cost competitiveness and high quality products,” Kelly told FoodNavigator.com.He agreed with the board’s reasoning for the growth and said that it is underpinned by the strong international commodity price environment and volume in key categories.The strongest categories driving growth were dairy (€2.6bn), meat (€2.59bn), prepared foods (€1.5bn) and seafood (€420m), the data showed.Micheal Carey, chairman of the Irish food board, Bord Bia, said: “The meat and dairy sectors account for almost two-thirds of total food and drink exports, and indications that breeding herds are expanding, combined with the lifting of milk quotas from 2015, will underpin export growth into the future.”Carey noted that the beef industry achieved an increase in market returns, almost twice the European average.“Global market conditions, reflected in strong commodity prices, remain favourable and exporters are voicing continued optimism about their business prospects for the year ahead,” Carey added.He said that there is continued diversification by industry into new markets, with exports to Asia up by one-third and many producers committing to further expansion.Fast, underpinning growthThe data showed that for the first nine months of 2011, exports in food and drinks sector increased at three times the rate of the country’s total merchandise exports.This sector now accounts for 25% of the rise in total export revenue in Ireland.Figures revealed strength in this sector, with the value of Irish food and drink exports increasing by €1.8 billion over the last two years.Carey said: “This is an excellent achievement and the industry is to be commended for its strong export performance.”The board noted that immediate prospects for Irish food and drink exports in 2012 remain positive. However some growth will be limited in the short term due to the softening in global commodity prices and lower volume output availability in some sectors. 
Favourable market trends and successful business strategies have driven strong profits in Agrana’s sugar and starch segments, creating 20.2% growth for the first three quarters of 2011|12, the CEO said.Sugar giant Agrana pegged revenue for Q1-Q3 at €1,952.2 million with Q3 bringing in revenues of €667.6m, although it faced on-going challenges in its fruit preparations business.Johann Marihart, CEO of Agrana, said that market trends, particularly in the sugar industry, had proved favourable for business.Higher input market prices had driven sugar costs up, enabling the company to more or less double its operating profit, Marihart told FoodNavigator.com.Minus exceptional costs, Agrana noted a 13.6% operating margin for its sugar segment, up from 4.6% from the same period last year.The situation in Brazil, with fewer farmers planting due to rain, droughts and lower prices for cane sugar, is the main reason for an increase in market prices, Marihart said, and this is “something we think will not change very much in the next year.”Sugar strengthsTimely sugar sourcing in the world market as well as the availability of non-quota sugar also helped sales, the company noted.Marihart added: “We also gained import licenses for all sugars for refining, and were therefore in a position to refine and sell a lot more on the market.”Agrana’s sugar segment pulled in revenues of €691.4m for Q1-Q3, up from €560.1m on the previous year.The European sugar market is stable, Marihart said, with the global market mounting 1-2% each year due to population growth, a trend that will indirectly benefit Agrana due to global sourcing policies.Starch strengthsOverall starch revenues were €587.5m for Q1-Q3, up from €424.6m for last year’s period, with production facilities in Austria, Hungary and Romania generating good earnings. Higher market prices for all major groups of core and by-products, influenced by the sugar market, also drove revenue.Alluding to the weaker fruit segment of the business, Marihart said that it was not the fruit concentrate side of the business, but rather the fruit preparations for the dairy industry that had declined.There had been a decrease in consumption, he said, particularly in the premium and value-added dairy sector.Marihart said that while losses in the fruit segment cannot be compensated, he had confidence in driving growth in Q4 as well as next year, in what he described a “stagnating and declining market”. He added: “The strategy of our company is to have at least three legs, and one leg is currently a little weaker. In the past it was vice versa, with sugar being weaker.”Expected revenue for the full 2011|12 financial year, is forecast at €2.5 billion, up from €2.17bn in 2010|11. 
Natural mold inhibitors are gaining ground in the bakery sectorThe global food preservative market is set to grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 2.5% in the next five years, according to a new report  from Markets and Markets.By the end of 2016, it will be worth more than $2.55bn in 2016, with growth boosted by strong demand for natural preservatives in developed markets and continued demand for processed foods in emerging markets, claims the market researcher."The CAGR in Europe is mainly driven by the fast growth in the natural preservatives segment with the fastest growth in Germany, France, the UK and Italy. “The trend of natural preservatives has originated from the appeal of European nations to market the clean label food products free of additives, especially synthetic variants. And, hence, the changing lifestyle and the booming food and beverage industry have given a boost to the demand for natural preservatives.” However, it notes that novel processing technologies such as high pressure processing and pulsed light are in some cases doing away with the need for preservatives altogether. As of 2011, the largest market for preservatives was North America ($878.5m), followed by Asia Pacific (716.7m), Europe ($393m) and the rest of the world ($352.2m).Natural preservativesSpeaking to FoodNavigator-USA last year , Danisco global business director for bioprotection Nathalie Brosse said growing pressure on manufacturers to oust synthetic anti-oxidants and anti-microbials from labels was driving rapid growth in natural preservatives in the US.While some beverages and meat products still presented a challenge to firms looking to avoid synthetic preservatives, natural alternatives were increasingly matching synthetics in terms of efficiency and cost in use, claimed Brosse.  “We’re seeing double-digit growth here and all the evidence suggests we can sustain that for the immediate future. Surveys show something like 70% of consumers in the US people want products with natural preservatives and all of our customers are looking for natural products where possible. It has really become the mainstream now.” But manufacturers were not just buying natural anti-microbials to ‘clean up’ labels, she added. “Some natural mold inhibitors such as Natamax deliver a much cleaner, fresher flavor and a longer shelf-life in products such as bread and tortillas than foods using sorbate for example. You can really smell sorbate in pan bread.”  As for cost, natural protective solutions were generally more expensive per kilo, but could prove surprisingly cost competitive on a cost-in-use basis because they could often be used at very low dosages, she claimed.What’s new?R&D teams at Danisco were investing a lot of money into screening new fermentates, fruit extracts, plant extracts and essential oils to assess their efficacy as anti-microbials or anti-oxidants, she added. “Marine based anti-microbial ingredients are also looking very promising, but we’re only at the preliminary stages of research in this area.”Brett Thompson, global product manager at Danisco, told FoodNavigator-USA in September that its new natural preservative BioVia YM 10 (a blend of cultured dextrose and plant extracts) was just as effective at tackling hard-to-control spoilage yeasts as potassium sorbate.He added: “Food manufacturers are well aware of consumer demand for more natural products with friendlier labels, but many have hesitated to choose a natural food protection solution because they wanted every bit of the effectiveness they could get from traditional chemical alternatives.“We think BioVia will change that. It simply takes that objection to natural solutions off the table." 
DuPont confirmed it has reached a settlement with an Italian company after launching legal action to protect a patented refrigerant product used in commercial applications.The firm’s Switzerland-based operations said it had taken joint action with Star Refrigeration Glasgow, UK, over non-ozone depleting R-422D - a trademarked refrigerant which is marketed to DuPont as ISCLEON MO29. DuPont said it is the sole licensee under a Star Refrigeration patent covering the products used to retrofit and service commercial refrigeration and building air conditioning equipment.“DuPont is committed to protect intellectual property for refrigerants such as DuPont ISCEON MO29,” said Diane Iuliano Picho, global business refrigerant manager. “The protection of intellectual property is critical to ensuring our continued investment in new technologies and products for the cooling marketplace.”The company told FoodProductionDaily.com it was unable to give any further details under the terms of the legal deal reached with the reseller in Italy. 
Lutein-enhanced egg yolks are demonstrating eye benefits (in humans if not chickens)Dutch firm Newtricious has won undisclosed funding from a local investment consortium that will advance its egg-focused R&D to drive products to shelves in, “two to three years”.Newtricious is an agro-food spin-off that reached the point where its European Food Safety Authority (EFSA)-minded R&D programme exhausted its seed funding, leading to the investment commitment from Brabant Life Sciences Seed Fund (BLSF), the Industry Bank LIOF, Nedermaas Hightech Ventures and the innovation fund of the Limburg province. The company has two main offerings: Lutein-enhanced egg yolks targeting the eye issue, age-related, macular degeneration (AMD), for which an egg yolk-based dairy drink template has been produced, along with a powdered version.Egg white peptides for cardiovascular and diabetic benefits are less advanced on the R&D curve.Chief business officer, Paul Jonker, told NutraIngredients the marigold-derived, lutein-enhanced egg yolks was the most advanced with a human, clinical trial completed and being analysed and another about to get underway. Jonker said this data may not be made available for immediate peer review because the company would likely in 2013-14 submit an article 13.5 proprietary data claim for the lutein-egg yolks to European Union nutrition and health claims process (NHCR), a regulation it said had guided its R&D activities since company conception in 2006. “We are going for the 13.5 AMD claim so we are likely to try and protect this data,” he said of the area that has already been controversially rejected by EFSA’s health claims panel, despite the existence of lutein-based AMD claims in EU member states like France.“We have very closely observed the regulation, it has guided our development in every way and we are confident we can win a claim when the research is completed and we make our dossier. Of course any company working in this area should be concerned about EFSA, but we think the regulation, while stringent, is fair.”“We are confident we can complete a dossier that will be compliant with the requirements.”Newtricious’ lutein offering was differentiated due to the egg yolk carrier which had been backed in Tufts University research to deliver better bioavailability (J. Nutr. 134: 1887–1893, 2004), he said.Fresh fundsJonker said the investment had come from a region of the Netherlands where there exist institutes that have been investigating and investing in the “interface between health and food”.Newtricious will next week open an office close to the source of its new investment area where it has access to the R&D activities and business resources.The fresh investment also includes credit lines with an investment agency of the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs, Agriculture and Innovation and Rabobank Venray. In a statement the founder and CEO of BLSF said: “Newtricious is a company that shows in its strategy how one can develop true added value in the agro-food industry. It is a company that undertakes the development of functional foods in an energetic and responsible manner. The company has the management team that has the right expertise to do the right things on the interface between food and pharma.” Newtricious founder and CEO Jos Nelissen added the funding, “gives us the financial room and the possibilities to accelerate the realization of our innovative development strategy, and to bring our products to the market in collaboration with commercial partners – in order to make them rapidly available for consumers worldwide.”   
Mars Chocolat France has announced plans for a multimillion investment in its Haguenau plant that will boost the site’s production capacity by 20%.The Haguenau facility in Alsace won the €40m investment ahead of another Mars factory in Janaszowek, Poland after improving its cost efficiency by 20% in the last three years and expanding production capacity by 10% in 2011.M&M production boostThe site currently provides around 90% of M&Ms to the European market and also produces a significant portion of the company’s Mars bars.Mars France said in a statement to ConfectioneryNews.com: “This decision was taken to respond to the increasing demand of M&M’s on the European market. It aims at increasing the production capacity of the Haguenau firm by 20 % in order to respond to this demand.”“The investment will mainly aim at improving, modernizing the equipment and the machine and optimising the existing surface,” it said.Mars is expected to recruit an additional 30 people to meet the new production demands.€5m green initiativeMars added in its statement: “This €40m investment will also be accompanied by a €5m investment in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 60% by ensuring its supply in ‘green steam’.” Mars France is currently finalising a partnership with energy firms Sita and Cofely of GDF Suez and Suez Environnement.The Haguenau factory is expected to benefit from this partnership by using the energy produced from the treatment of residual waste to reduce its emissions by 60%.Alsace sitesMars has another site in the Alsace region at Steinborg. Combined, the two sites employ around 1,200 people. The latest investment is only for Haguenau but, between 2007 and 2010, a combined €65m has been invested in the two sites. The Haguenau site was the first to be constructed in 1974. It is export orientated, with over 75% of produce being exported to around 30 countries mainly in Europe.The renovation is expected to be completed in 2013. 
A snapshot of Skånemejerier's product rangeGroupe Lactalis’ bid to take over Sweden’s second largest dairy player fits with the French firm’s strategy of reducing its reliance on cheese, and would give it further brands with which to pursue milk product growth in emerging markets, according to Euromonitor International.The administrative council of Swedish dairy co-operative Skånemejerier approved a rule change on Monday that clears the firm’s potential sale to private French dairy conglomerate Groupe Lactalis.Skånemejerier began talks with Groupe Lactalis last year, but the status of the association was changed last year to pursue talks with the French company, and yesterday’s vote saw 35 out of 42 council members vote in favour of new governing statutes allowing this move.The southern Swedish firm said in a statement that negotiations on the sale are almost complete, and although details remained to be ironed-out, Lactalis could assume control from March 1.A Groupe Lactalis spokesman told DairyReporter.com this morning: “I can confirm that after Monday’s vote, we are continuing discussions with Skånemejerier.”Skånemejerier has faced tough competition within Sweden over the last couple of years, leading it to welcome the French company’s approach.Euromonitor International senior company analyst, Ildiko Szalai told DairyReporter.com: “The fact that Lactalis went for the second-largest dairy player in Sweden certainly fits with its acquisition strategy over the past decade, of key and national players within Europe.”Pushing beyond cheeseBetween 2006 to 2009 Lactalis acquired key or leading players within dairy in most eastern European countries – from Croatia to Romania to the Czech Republic, she added.“Comparing this move to the purchase of, say, Parmalat, then it’s totally different in terms of scale, but they’re trying to achieve the same thing. Lactalis is very highly reliant on cheese and on western Europe.” Szalai said.She explained that Skånemejerier only generated around 30% of its sales in cheese, with the other 70% coming from drinking milk, yogurts and other dairy products.“These type of acquisitions try to reduce that reliance, both in terms of geography (market coverage) and category coverage. Cheese is growing and is high-margin in western Europe,” she added.“But if you look at the Asia Pacific or Latin America, it’s drinking milk products that are driving overall dairy market growth, and this is what Lactalis has been purchasing,” Szalai said.“The acquisition provides a growth platform for Lactalis in Sweden, but that said the market there is quite moderately sized (worth US $4bn in 2011), which is about 3% of the Western European dairy market, with very little growth predicted over a largely flat 2011-2016 period.”Arla will continue to dominateLactalis was now only the seventh-largest player in the Swedish market with a 1.6% market value share in 2010, Szalai said. Buying Skånemejerier would make it number two with a 10% share, but this would not threaten Arla’s market leadership given its 48% share (2010), she added.Skånemejerier has not released any details of the agreement under discussion between the two companies.But asked whether Lactalis had given any guarantees regarding sites owned by the Swedish dairy and jobs, a spokesman said that the company’s council didn’t want to sell up to anyone who wanted to “lay down” the business.Farmers who supplied Skånemejerier with milk wanted to have security in the coming years in terms of producing, delivering and getting paid well for the milk from their farms, he added.He said: “It’s certainly been said about Groupe Lactalis that they’re very concerned about the local brands in the companies that they buy. So we hope for a strong owner who can develop our brands, and can keep the dairy production in Skåne, and that the farmers can continue to produce milk in future.”Skånemejerier is owned by approximately 570 dairy farmers in southern Sweden, and its brands include Skånemejerier, Bravo, Allerum, Småland, Blekinge Milk. 
Chr. Hansen Q1 results shows ROI on invested capital in colours of 29%  Chr. Hansen’s first quarter results for financial year 2011/12 are a notch stronger than analysts had expected.“12% organic growth in what many regard as an extremely turbulent quarter is impressive,” said Denmark-based Carnegie analyst Lars Topholm.Reported revenue for the quarter was €168m, up 12% compared to Q1 2010/11. Organic growth was adjusted to 12% from 13% to reflect changes in raw material prices for carmine.Net profit for the period was €26m compared to €23m in Q1 2010/11, said the supplier with CEO Lars Frederiksen claiming the strong performance in Q1 means Chr. Hansen is reiterating its outlook for the year. He expects organic growth to be around 7% to 10% for 2011/12.Speaking to this publication, the CEO said the company expects growth in all regions for 2011/12, even in those markets perceived to be saturated such as North America and Europe. Increased consumption of milk products in emerging markets continues to drive growth in the cultures and enzymes division, notes Frederiksen but conversion from in-house bulk starter to industrialized produced cultures is also fuelling profits. In Q1, revenue in the division amounted to €101m, an increase, notes Chr. Hansen, of 7% compared to the same period last year, corresponding to an organic growth of 8%. Capital in colours In terms of other developments in the quarter, Carnegie’s Topholm said the return on investment (ROI) in the Danish supplier’s colour business is considerable - almost doubling since the same quarter in 2011. “The colour division may have traditionally been perceived as providing low margin returns but it is also a production area that requires low capital input, with the Chr. Hansen division showing ROI on invested capital in colours of 29% in the quarter," he told this publication. Tophom added: “It is not enough just to look at the margins.”And he also cites the lower carmine prices over the past few months as has having played a role in offsetting input costs in colour production for the producer.Ownership switch But the Carnegie analyst puts today’s hike in shares in the Danish supplier more down to the change in ownership in Chr. Hansen announced by the company this morning - the majority shareholder in the Danish company, PAI Partners, is to sell its 25.66% stake to Novo for around €560m. The divesture follows six years of involvement of the private equity group in Chr. Hansen. The deal is subject to the customary regulatory approvals. “We believe Chr.Hansen will benefit from having Novo on board as a long-term, stable shareholder,” said Frédéric Stévenin, a spokesperson for PAI.The Chr. Hansen CEO said the company was only informed about the transaction this morning. “But it was no secret that PAI was looking to sell its shares in Chr. Hansen after interim shedding of its stocks over the past 18 months,” he stressed. PAI Partners did a tremendous job with the Danish group, added Carnegie’s Topholm, and he reckons the decision of Novo to purchase the 25.6% stake makes “good business sense” as Chr. Hansen offers "terrific long term growth potential." But the analyst was quick to point out that he does not see any merger potential arising out of the fact that Novo is also a major shareholder in Novozymes due to what he terms a lack of synergies between the two ingredients firms. “While Novozymes and Chr. Hansen are both involved in bioscience and fermented production, there is minimum overlap in the markets they serve.”  
There is currently an oversupply of certified sustainable palm oil (CSPO) in Malaysia due to a lack of demand from industry players, according to leading politician in that country.Tan Sri Bernard Compok, minister of plantation industries and commodities, said there is insufficient take up of CSPO despite producers throughout Malaysia working hard to meet international requirements for sustainable practices and certification, reported Malaysian media outlet, The Star.The Malaysian lawmaker, who was speaking at the Sabah Wildlife Conservation Colloquium, added that working towards international standards on sustainability in palm oil production is costing producers more and this is reflected in the price of CSPO.Typical estimates peg extra costs of farming palm oil sustainably at between $7 and $10 per tonne.Indeed data from the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO) shows a clear gap in current supply and demand of CSPO.Analysis showed that supply of CSPO in November last year was around 450,000 metric tonnes, yet sales were pegged at only 180,000 metric tonnes.Driving and motivating take-upDarrel Webber, secretary general of RSPO, said that boosting demand for CSPO is a key priority for the organisation.“The uptake has been steadily increasing, but it continues to require accelerated commitment,” Webber told FoodNavigator.com in an emailed statement.He notes an increase in demand for CSPO from 25.3% in 2009 to 46.2% in 2010 and 51.2% as of November 2011.WWF scorecard Webber said that initiatives that will support the tracking of and motivation for companies along the palm oil supply chain to use more CSPO in their products include the WWF Palm Oil Buyers Scorecard.Launched in November 2011, it measures the commitment and performance of major retailers and manufacturers regarding use of CSPO. “It acknowledges that companies have shown progress in terms of procurement of CSPO and is a reminder to companies that have failed to live up to commitments,” he added.Webber said that the RSPO trademark logo  will be a core part of its strategy in stimulating demand for sustainable oil, but added that the organisation is “beyond merely a certification scheme or standard.”“We are a multi stakeholder initiative that represents the production front; demand end and everything in between,” he said.The dynamics and system are in place to meet targets, he said, it is only a matter of time.One of its biggest current challenges for the RSPO is ensuring conditions are in place in two of the biggest consumer markets for palm oil, India and China, for greater take-up of CSPO, with the organisation conducting outreach work to create awareness in both these countries.Pledges madeThe RSPO’s work has triggered a host of industry pledges committing to sourcing 100% CSPO for use in their food and personal care products within the next few years by multinationals such as Unilever.However Anneke Assink, group procurement manager at Friesland Campina, previously told FoodNavigator.com that there is attitude exists among some food makers that all palm oil will be ‘automatically’ sustainable by 2015 and so they see little point in implementing sustainable palm oil sourcing policies now. 
Advances in enzyme technologies, coupled with new technologies to remove aflatoxin, may offer a way to produce value-added ingredients from potentially contaminated by-products, say researchers.The study – published in the Journal of Food Biochemistry – evaluated the properties of water soluble fractions prepared from peanut meal waste by breaking down (hydrolysis) the meal with different commercial proteases. The results revealed that the processes improved functional and nutritional properties of the peanut protein.The researchers, from the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), reported that the antioxidant capacities of all the hydrolysed extracts were greater than the un-hydrolysed peanut meal. The team also reported that the type of enzyme used to hydrolyse the peanut meal resulted in the presence of different levels of sugars in the extract, which they said would influence later functionalities in addition to affecting downstream drying and processing of the extract. “Recently described efforts to sequester aflatoxin from peanut meal during processing have proven successful, potentially allowing for processing of this material into value-added components including aflatoxin-free protein/peptide concentrates,” said the researchers, led by Jack Davis or the UDSA’s Agricultural Research Service.Peanut mealPeanut meal is the defatted, low-value, by-product of commercial peanut oil production. The USDA researchers noted that the annual production of peanut meal in the USA alone is around 100,000 tons.The by-product meal is an excellent source of protein (containing between 45–55%), however, high levels of aflatoxin are usually found in the meal, and so its use is currently limited to applications in feed and fertilizer markets. Davis and his team noted that recent studies have shown that the addition of commercially available sodium bentonite clay can effectively remove aflatoxins within aqueous dispersions of contaminated peanut meal during protein extraction.The researchers noted that good functionality “is important for any protein-based ingredient to allow efficient utilization in a broad range of food systems.” The team added that whilst it is well known that peanut protein contained within edible flours or that isolated from raw or roasted seed “can effectively serve as a functional food ingredient in various applications ... there is limited work directly pertaining to the functionality of peanut meal protein.”Research detailsDefatted peanut meal was (provided by Golden Peanut Company, USA) was dispersed in water by the research team before being , broken down (hydrolysed) peanut meal waste dispersions with different enzymes (alcalase, flavourzyme and pepsin) in an effort to improve functional and nutritional properties of the resulting extracts. Davis and his team reported that the degree of hydrolysis achieved by the enzymes ranged from between 20 and 60% for alcalase, to between 10 and 20% for pepsin, and 10 to 70% for flavourzyme.The antioxidant capacities of all hydrolysates were also found to be greater than unhydrolyzed controls, and correlated linearly with the degree of hydolysation – whereas antioxidant capacities of hydrolysates were minimally dependent on bicinchoninic acid protein solubility or relative amino acid distribution, said the researchers.They also found that soluble glucose, fructose and sucrose contents were distinctly different in the isolates for each of the three enzymes. “Levels of these sugars are important when considering: (1) downstream drying applications for these soluble extracts; and (2) the final functionality of dried ingredients prepared from these soluble extracts,” noted Davis and his team.For example, they noted that when alcalase is used to break down the peanut meal, the resulting isolates have increased contents of glucose and sucrose with increasing hydrolysis time, whilst fructose content was minimally affected. Source: Journal of Food Biochemistry Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1111/j.1745-4514.2011.00566.x “Value-added processing of peanut meal: Enzymatic hydrolysis to improve functional and nutritional properties of water soluble extracts” Authors: L.E. Kane, J.P. Davis, A.J. Oakes, L.L. Dean, T.H. Sanders 
Barry Callebaut has acquired a 100% stake in Spanish company La Morella Nuts for an undisclosed sum as it aims to be the European leader for nut products.The acquisition is expected to create synergies between the business segments of chocolate and nut products.The company has also indicated that it gives it scope to expand nut production in Asia-Pacific and the Americas.Raphael Wermuth, external communications manager for Barry Callebaut, told ConfectioneryNews.com: “In general, we see a growing trend for fillings, also for example for nut-based fillings.”“In addition, we see a growing trend for nut-based inclusions. That is why La Morella Nuts' product portfolio is interesting for us and complementing our product portfolio in the Gourmet and Food Manufacturers Products business in an ideal way.”La MorellaLa Morella produces nut-based ingredients for confectionery, bakery and snacks industry in Europe.Its manufactures specialty nut products which were not previously part of Callebaut’s portfolio including cashews, pecans, pistachios, and macadamias.The company has 90 employees operating across two plants in Castellvell del Camp and Reus where it manufactures around 8,000 tonnes of nut specialities annually. The company recorded sales revenues of €33m in 2011.In the past few years it has entered markets in Russia and Asia.La Morella will be integrated into Callebaut’s business Region Europe later this month.Joaquim M. Barriach, CEO of La Morella Nuts, said the deal would help La Morella expand its market reach with chocolate synergies.“Barry Callebaut makes it possible for us to better position ourselves as a premier manufacturer of quality nuts," he said.Potential beyond EUWermuth said that Callebaut’s customer preference for nut based products was a global trend.“That is also why we see an interesting potential with the recent acquisition to expand to our other regions like Asia-Pacific or Americas,” he said.Asked if there were further plans to expand nut production capacity beyond Europe, Wermuth said that it was too early to say. 
Sensient plans a £13M investment in its UK facilitiesGlobal flavour, colour and fragrance firm Sensient is to invest £13M ($20M) in improved UK production facilities.The firm has ear-marked £4.1M ($6.4M) to improve efficiencies at its Natural Origins botanical extracts plant at Bletchley. The facility produces natural flavour and aroma profiles of original botanicals used in a wide range of applications in beverage, sweet, savoury and dairy products.  Process improvements  Also planned as part of the investment programme are upgrades to its laboratories and offices and further process improvements to its flavour production facilities.  Kenneth Manning, chairman, president and ceo of Sensient Technologies Corporation, said:“These investments reinforce our commitment to long-term business growth in the UK. “Our new state-of-the-art flavour facilities will service our customers locally in the UK and elsewhere. We now have 75 locations in 35 countries providing flavours, fragrances and colours to customers throughout the world.” 
Premier Foods has refused to comment on media speculation that it is set to sell off its jam and pickles brands to reduce its debt burden.Sources close to the deal, report Reuters, said that the UK food manufacturer is aiming to divest itself of its Hartley's jams and Hayward’s pickles businesses for over £200m (€242m). Premier Foods is trying to sell a range of assets to reduce its debt mountain. The report claims that Premier has appointed two investment banks to sell the two brands.But when contacted by FoodNavigator.com this morning, a spokesperson for the UK food company would not be drawn on whether there was anything behind the market rumours. The stated strategy of Premier’s new CEO, Michael Clarke, is to focus the group on eight of its biggest brands while selling off other businesses to meet the upcoming covenant test from its banks.December last year saw the UK food maker sell its four Irish brands, Chivers, Gateaux, McDonnells and the Erin licence to the Boyne Valley Group for £34.7m. The late 2011 divesture followed Premier’s earlier disposal of chilled foods division Brookes Avana to the 2 Sisters group. Shore Capital analyst, Darren Shirley, claims nothing can be ruled out in terms of Premier’s disposal plans, adding that Hartley’s is a good brand in what is not a high performing category. "It would provide a consolidation opportunity for another jam producer as it is still a profitable arena." But he flagged up analysts’ worries about the UK group’s “ever-decreasing circle”. Shirley added: “All Premier brands are potentially for sale but we remain concerned about the group’s capacity to generate enough cash flow if it continues to shrink.”Julian Wild, food group director at UK law firm, Rollits, agrees, and while he rates the new management team at Premier, he told this publication back in December: “Premier is desperate for cash. But the question is how, following these divestments, is the team going to be able to take the profits forward?”“Jams and pickles are as good an asset for disposal as any other,” said another industry insider who wished to remain anonymous. He told this publication that private equity would be the most likely buyer of Hartley’s or the Hayward’s ranges. “The major food companies wouldn't be interested and the midcaps don't have the balance sheet,” said the UK food sector analyst. 
Modified probiotics could help to reduce the risk of food borne infections such as Listeria by blocking the bacteria from entering the body in the gut, say researchers.The study – published in PLoS ONE – reports that the use of a recombinant probiotic containing adhesion proteins found in the Listeria monocytogenes could be used as a method to reduce infection with L. monocytogenes in high-risk populations.Professor Arun Bhunia, of Purdue University, USA, revealed that genetically engineering the same proteins that allow Listeria to pass through intestinal cells and into bloodstreams into a probiotic can help to block the pathways – thus reducing the risk of infection."Based on the research, it looks very promising that we would get a significant reduction in Listeria infections," said Bhunia."It's creating a competition. If Listeria comes in, it doesn't find a place to attach or invade."The research team noted that the potential benefits of a recombinant probiotic would be two-fold – by directly acting as an antimicrobial agent against the target pathogen, but also by indirect offering general health benefits that the consumption of probiotics may bring.However it remains to be seen whether such a modified probiotic bacteria would be approved for use in foods or supplements by regulatory bodies.Probiotic preventionListeria is a foodborne pathogen that infects at risk people through consumption of contaminated food – causing a severe systemic infection known as listeriosis.The bacteria pose a significant health risk to pregnant women, newborns, the elderly, and other immunocompromised individuals.In the gut, the Listeria bacteria enter the bloodstream by using adhesion proteins (LAP) to help them pass through the gut lining.Bhunia and his colleagues explained that a recombinant probiotic expressing LAP could help to block Listeria from crossing the gut lining, thus promoting clearance and offering protection to high-risk populations. Study detailsThe research team investigated whether probiotic bacteria or LAP-expressing recombinant probiotics (Lactobacillus paracasei) were able to prevent infection by blocking adhesion and invasion of L. monocytogenes in culture of gut lining cells.The team reported that whilst several ‘wild type’ probiotic bacteria showed strong adhesion to gut lining cells, none were able to effectively prevent L. monocytogenes infection.However, they noted that exposure to an LAP-expressing recombinant probiotic between one and 24 hours before exposure to Listeria significantly reduced adhesion, invasion, and trans-epithelial translocation of the infectious bacteria.“Pre-exposure reduced L. monocytogenes translocation by as much as 46% after 24 hours,” explained the researchers.They also noted that the modified probiotic prevented Listeria mediated cell damage by more than 99% after one hour and 79% after 24 hours.“These data show promise for the use of recombinant probiotics in preventing L. Monocytogenes infection in high-risk populations,” concluded Bhunia and his team. Source: PLoS ONE Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029277 “Recombinant Probiotic Expressing Listeria Adhesion Protein Attenuates Listeria monocytogenes Virulence In Vitro”Authors: O.K. Koo, M.A.R. Amalaradjou, A.K. Bhunia  
Barry Callebaut has submitted an article 13.5 health claim dossier to the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) linking cocoa flavanols and healthy blood flow.“We cannot be sure but we’re confident,” spokesperson Raphael Wermurth told NutraIngredients this morning. “The dossier contains five clinical studies, some of which have not yet been published. We have been waiting for the outcome of some of these studies to see if they delivered positive outcomes and so we moved in the summer of 2011 to submit the claim.”He said the company had not yet received any queries from EFSA’s Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA) about the dossier under the nutrition and health claims regulation (NHCR).The submission comes even as the NDA in October 2010 rejected an article 13.1 dossier linking cocoa flavanols and protection against oxidative damage and the maintenance of normal blood pressure. There the NDA was unimpressed by 10 randomised clinical trials backing the blood pressure claim, saying the data was, “inconsistent.”That opinion can be found here. Healthy blood flowA posting on the EFSA website noted the proprietary and emerging science claim was for cocoa flavanols that could, “help maintain endothelium-dependant vasolidation which contributes to healthy blood flow”.Dr Mark J Tallon, the managing director of UK-based consultancy and food law experts, Nutrisciences, said he expected the claim bid to be successful.“It’s not surprising that previous attempts to get a positive opinion from EFSA of flavanols from cocoa has failed as very little evidence exists for blood pressure benefits,” Dr Tallon said.“However, providing you limit studies based on the specific flavanol and polyphenol content and type (i.e. monomer units), dose, and subject characteristics - strong evidence for flow-mediated dilatation could make a credible submission under 13.5.”EFSA’s to-date hardline on antioxidants played its part in the delay in Barry Callebaut submitting its claim as it carefully assessed the scientific literature, EFSA guidance and other opinions.Initially it sought to focus on blood flow, but included ‘endothelium-dependant vasolidation’ because that was what the evidence specifically indicated.Dr Tallon speculated that the difference between success and failure for the dossier could be the NDA view of some 30 other studies of varying types that provide supporting data to the claim area.“our own human clinical studies”Swiss-based Barry Callebaut actually announced its intention to lodge a claim in its 2011 annual report. There it stated: “For more than six years, we have been conducting our own human clinical studies to investigate the potential health benefits of cocoa.”“Based on the positive results of five clinical studies, finalized last year, we submitted our first dossier in the EU requesting approval of a health claim for products high in cocoa flavanols. We are hopeful to receive approval for various claims to help our customers differentiate their offerings.” 
UK bakery firm Warburtons has announced that it is to axe 73 jobs at its Oldham bakery after closure of the site.The news comes as the company plans a new facility in Bolton, set to open imminently.The company issued a statement which read: “The decision has been made to enable the business to produce and distribute products more efficiently and to maximise the £39m investment in new state-of-the-art technology, including new plants at Enfield, Bristol and Bolton.”In recent years, Warburtons has added a crumpet plant in Enfield and a bread bakery in Bristol.A hundred and one employees at the Shaw, Oldham facility have been relocated to other Warburtons sites, found alternative roles or taken early retirement.The remaining 73 were made redundant.Robert Higginson, MD of Warburtons said: “Closing a bakery is the hardest decision a family firm like Warburtons has to make but these changes to our manufacturing and distribution operations are vital to ensure we can continue to meet the demands of our customers and consumers.”New Bolton plantTearmh France, corporate communications manager at Warburtons, told BakeryAndSnacks.com that a new bakery in Bolton producing a wide range of Warburtons products was “due to be completed any time now”.The new facility will add to Warburtons’ existing facility in BoltonMore job threats?This existing plant was forced into temporary closure in 2010 following a fire believed to have been started in an industrial oven.Asked if the opening of the new Bolton bakery would signal the end of the existing plant, France said: “There are no plans to lose any more bakeries in the UK.”Future investmentThe Oldham closure was announced shortly before the company said it would spend £200m in the next five years in a speech given by executive director Ross Warburton at the Society of Food Hygiene and Technology's 2011 annual lecture in NovemberFrance said that plans on how the money is to be spent were yet to be decided. ExportsThe company currently has 13 manufacturing facilities all located in the UK.It is in the process of a continued trial in collaboration with Tesco to export its goods in Eastern Europe.Ross Warburton indicated in his speech his desire to see a bakery located in the former eastern bloc supplying Poland and the Czech Republic.France was asked if any of the £200m would be spent on manufacturing facilities in mainland Europe, but she said there were no plans to date. 
Mothers who consume a poor diet through pregnancy risk leaving their children less able to store fats correctly in later life, leading to a higher risk of diabetes, according to new research in rats.The animal study – published in the journal Cell Death and Differentiation – reports new insights into why nutrition during early development in the womb permanently influences later health.They noted that whilst it is well understood that poor maternal diet can increase the later risk of type 2 diabetes and coronary heart disease – but the molecular mechanisms underlying such effects are poorly defined. Willis and her team have now found such a mechanism – revealing that the processes involved in fat distribution and storage are controlled by a molecule called miR-483-3p. They found that miR-483-3p was produced at higher levels in individuals who had experienced a poor diet in their mother's wombs than those who were better nourished – leading to the development of smaller fat cells that left offspring less able to store fats in adulthood. "One of the ways that our bodies cope with a rich modern western diet is by storing excess calories in fat cells,” said Professor Anne Willis of the University of Leicester, UK – who co-led the study.“When these cells aren't able to absorb the excess then fats get deposited in other places, like the liver, where they are much more dangerous and can lead to type 2 diabetes," she explained.The research team said their findings will contribute to the understanding of fundamental biological processes, “but also have important implications for improving human health as programmed miRNAs represent potential markers of disease risk as well as providing targets of rational therapeutic intervention strategies.”Study detailsIn the new study, the research team reported that when pregnant rats were fed low protein diets, their offspring had higher levels of miR-483-3p.Willis explained that the higher levels of miR-483-3p led to them developing smaller fat cells and left them less able to store fats in adulthood. The then revealed that found that miR-483-3p works by suppressing a protein called GDF3. As a result she explained that the rats were less likely to become fat when fed a high calorie diet, but were at a higher risk of developing diabetes. In order to back up their findings, the research team then investigated the levels of miR-483-3p in humans born after poor maternal nutrition – finding that those born with a low birth weight had elevated levels of miR-483-3p and reduced levels of GDF3.The team noted that people born with a low birth weight had 70% less GDF3 than those born at a normal weight.“Our observation that the changes in miRNA expression in both rats and humans occur before the development of the metabolic phenotype suggests that they are causative and do not arise as a consequence of metabolic dysfunction,” explained the researchers.  Source: Cell Death and Differentiation  Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.183 “Programming of adipose tissue miR-483-3p and GDF-3 expression by maternal diet in type 2 diabetes”Authors: D. Ferland-McCollough, D.S. Fernandez-Twinn, I.G. Cannell, H. David, M. Warner, et al 
Consuming up to 50% of all grain foods as refined grains will not lead to any increased disease risk, according to a study reviewing all relevant literature from the Noughties. The study ‘Evaluation of the evidence between consumption of refined grains and health outcomes’ published online ahead of inclusion in the journal Nutrition Review assessed 135 articles on refined grain foods published between 2000-2010.It concluded that no increased risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes or weight gain came from eating 50% of all grain foods as refined grain foods which don’t have high levels of added fat, sugar or sodium.The review was conducted by Peter G Williams of the University of Wollongong, Australia.High consumption ill-advisedDespite establishing no link between refined grain foods and increased disease risk, Williams said that whole grain options should be preferred for cereals.“The protective effects of whole grains are well established, and in order to promote increased consumption without exceeding total grain consumption recommendations, there has to be a consequent decrease in the amount of refined-grain foods consumed,” he said. “In all communications with the public, the importance of limiting cereal-based foods that are high in added fat, sugar, and sodium still needs to be emphasized,” he continued.Potential cancer risk with high intakesThe review did note a handful of studies that associated high intakes of refined grain foods with some types of cancer.However, it added that “at moderate levels of consumption the risks were not significant”.For the purposes of the study, refined grain foods included breads, breakfast cereals and pasta.Study: Williams, P. G. (2012), Evaluation of the evidence between consumption of refined grains and health outcomes. Nutrition Reviews. doi: 10.1111/j.1753-4887.2011.00452.x 
The balance of food production power is shifting from governments to trans national corporationsThe balance of power in global food production is shifting away from national governments to multi-national firms and from western economies to emerging nations, warns a new report from SAC’s Rural Policy Centre. In the first of a two-part series, we focus on the growing power of trans-national corporations (TNCs).“Consolidation of TNCs has seen some shifting of the focus of power from governments and supra-national bodies towards corporate business,” according to the report Power in Agriculture.In parallel, state intervention in agriculture and the supply chain, particularly in the EU, is diminishing.Speaking at the Oxford Farming Conference, whose organisers commissioned the report, one of its authors Dr Alan Renwick, said: “TNCs are becoming increasingly dominant in all aspects of the supply chain.” For example, four firms control more than 75% to 90% of the international grain trade.Also, just 10 firms are responsible for 40% of the global retail market.Annual turnoverTop TNC, ranked by annual turnover, was identified as the Swiss-based firm Nestlé with a turnover of more than $112bn.Archer-Daniels-Midland (ADM) and Unilever were ranked second and third with annual sales of $62bn and $59bn respectively.Total revenue from the global food products industry, consisting of agricultural products and packaged foods, was estimated at $3.2 trillion in 2008.Responding to the report, Caroline Spelman, secretary of state for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, acknowledged that the UK is home to “some of the world’s most successful and influential agri-food corporations.“I’m thinking of Unilever, Tesco and Associated British Foods. The UK government understands the power of these organisations and how vital they are in building a sustainable food system and a green and growing global economy.”Spelman added that the government understands its role in ensuring that corporations use their power positively. “We’re taking steps, including the introduction of a groceries code adjudicator, to safeguard it.“We also know that these corporations provide the bridgehead to emerging economies for our [food] and farming industry.” But not all speakers shared her view of the benign impact of TNCs. Andrew Blenkiron, estate director of large-scale food producer Euston Estates, warned of the near unfettered power that TNCs now wield.“The influence of TNCs is hyper political with many having a turnover many times the GDP [gross domestic product] of numerous small nations … They probably make even more from the greed that is ‘the market trader". “No longer is the true supply and demand equation relevant; trade is rampant on rumour and conjecture. There is no doubt that volatility in the food supply chain has served to further increase TNC’s influence and power.”Tony Hehir, Australian organic dairy farmer, warned that his country’s grains, pork and tomato industries are already dominated by TNCs. Without consequence"TNCs are now firmly entrenched in the grains industry. Grain farmers are now disadvantaged by delivery contracts with penalties for non compliance by the producer, yet absolute discretion without consequence for the TNC buyer.Power has shifted very rapidly from the producer since the advent of TNC domination of this industry.”In part two of this series, to be published later this week, we chart the shifting balance of global food production power from western countries to emerging nations.Listen to Cedric Porter, chair of the Oxford Farming Conference, explain key messages for food manufacturers from the conference by clicking here. 
Workers at the Marmite maker will demonstrate in London tomorrow over the continuing pension rowOnly a last minute change-of-heart from consumer giant Unilever will prevent hundreds of its workers hitting the streets of London tomorrow to demonstrate over changes to their pensions.Further strike action will also take place later this month as members of the Unite, Usdaw and GMB unions look set to call strikes on eight sites across the UK for up to 12 days from January 17.Unite national officer Jennie Formby told FoodManufacture.co.uk that the strikes are now inevitable unless the consumer giant rethinks plans to scrap the firm’s final salary scheme which will cut retirement income for staff by up to 40%.CompromiseShe said: “The strikes will definitely be going ahead unless Unilever can compromise and sit down and discuss changes to the plans."As it stands, Unilever has made it clear that it is not interested in talking and our members are angry that they are not being heard.”Formby said union representatives had now tried “on numerous occasions” to sit down and talk with the Marmite and PG Tips owner, which was of “great concern” to Unite members.“It is not quite the way we would expect the firm to behave, especially one that prides itself on having such a strong moral compass,” she added.As a result of the failed talks, Unilever workers will now head to the capital tomorrow aboard a “battle bus” in a bid to force the firm’s hand over the pension row.Poorer pensionsThe workers will be directing a message to Unilever shareholders, asking them to remember that this was a firm founded to bring "ethics" into commerce, according to Unite.Many members of staff are angry that the Unilever is pushing ahead with plans to make changes to its pension scheme that could lead to poorer pensions for more than one third of its employees.Unite has also labelled the firm “not as clean as you think” and accused it of being a “pension snatcher” ahead of the plans to hold a series of 24 hour strike across eight different sites beginning next week.The action will begin on January 17 and will come to an end 12 days later on January 29. Allan Black GMB national officer said: “Strike action at Unilever demonstrates that pensions are not just a matter of concern for public sector workers. “The concerns are shared by workers in private sector employers like Unilever too. The action also shows that ordinary workers will not stand idly by to watch profitable employers like Unilever jumping on the pension’s robbery bandwagon.”A Unilever spokesman said: “Whilst we fully respect the right of our employees to protest about the changes we are planning to make to our UK pensions arrangements, we remain deeply concerned by the disproportionate action the trade unions are taking.This was a tough but necessary choice which reflects the realities of rising life expectancy and increased market volatility. We believe the provision of final salary pensions is a broken model which is no longer appropriate for Unilever.” It is our responsibility to protect the long-term sustainability and competitiveness of our business, and to do so is in the best interests of our people, he added.The latest action follows workers at Unilever walking out over the same issue last month in what was the first national strike in the firm’s history. 
Wheat prices in 2012 are likely to be volatile and will be dictated by the global maize market and weather conditions, according to an analyst at the UK’s Agriculture & Horticulture Development Board (AHDB).David Eudall, senior analyst for cereals and oilseeds at AHDB, told BakeryAndSnacks.com that the theme for wheat prices throughout 2012 would be “uncertainty”.Prices were down before Christmas, but since then dry weather in South America has impacted the maize market which has had a knock on effect on wheat prices, he explained.Although wheat crops were not directly affected by the drought, wheat is currently reflecting the maize market as global stocks of maize are currently low.Blame it on the weatherman “It’s a weather market that everyone is concentrating on,” said Eudall. More rainfall in South America is thought to lead to a better maize crop, which would impact upon wheat prices.Dry conditions would lead to low maize stocks which would create volatility in wheat prices.He said bakery and snacks manufacturers would be well advised to monitor the grain market as a whole and closely observe the macroeconomic picture.Jack Watts, another senior analyst for cereals and oilseeds at ADHB, had previously said that wheat prices would be lower in 2012 at a conference last month before the dry conditions hit South America.“Prices for 2012 seem to be somewhat weaker for 2012. We have seen this downward pressure on prices for 2012, certainly since the crop was gone in the ground in September [2011] the price has fallen £20 per tonne,” he said in December. [video available here ]Look out for July Eudall said that the US was a key area for the world and had experienced two consecutive growing seasons with poor weather.The US yield of maize will come in July. A poor yield would prevent a replenishment of global maize stocks and drive up prices for wheat, while a strong yield would push prices lower.As of today, May 12 LIFFE wheat futures are up to £154.50 per tonne driven by fears for developing crops in Brazil and Argentina. 
A Brussels-based food industry body, setting out what it sees as priorities for the new Danish Presidency of the EU Council, again calls for an end to food taxes, greater support for SMEs, tighter trade relations and a more transparent commodities market.FoodDrinkEurope wants the Danish Presidency to focus squarely on the food and drink industry, which it maintains is a pillar of the EU economy. Denmark holds the post from 1 January until 31 July this year. The trade group is urging the implementation of the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with Ukraine and the maintenance of a strong rules-based multilateral trade system, citing the fact that the EU food and beverage manufacturing sector exports €65.3bn worth of products to third countries, generating a positive trade balance of around €9.8bn. Food taxesFoodDrinkEurope, echoing previous statements, claims that additional levies on food and drink products are regressive and urges the Presidency not to endorse such an approach. Last week saw French lawmakers approve legislation for the proposed tax on sugar sweetened beverages in the country – effective from this month. The duty, originally proposed last year , will form part of French austerity measures passed to help battle the debt crisis. The tax is expected to generate around €120m in revenue for the French government. The legislation is part of a growing trend in Europe to impose so called ‘sin taxes’ on food and drinks associated with poor health and obesity. Last year Hungary introduced a "fat tax" on goods with high fat, sugar and salt content, including soft drinks. Denmark and several other European countries also have soda taxes. Last week saw French lawmakers approve legislation for the proposed tax on sugar sweetened beverages in the country – effective from this month. The duty, originally proposed last year , will form part of French austerity measures passed to help battle the debt crisis. The tax is expected to generate around €120m in revenue for the French government. The legislation is part of a growing trend in Europe to impose so called ‘sin taxes’ on food and drinks associated with poor health and obesity. Last year Hungary introduced a "fat tax" on goods with high fat, sugar and salt content, including soft drinks. Denmark and several other European countries also have soda taxes. “In the absence of science-based evidence to support such measures with public health objectives, FoodDrinkEurope urges the Danish Presidency and other member states not to resort to additional taxes on food and drink products given their regressive nature and negative impact on lower income consumers." Commodity volatility Following the publication of the new 2020 proposals, FoodDrinkEurope said it is also urging more security of supply, sustainability and market orientation in the future CAP.The trade body stressed that it wants the Danish Presidency to work towards well-functioning and more transparent agricultural commodity derivatives markets when reacting to the Commission proposal on Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID).In addition, the group is demanding that the Presidency create a mechanism to finance regional research infrastructure and, through its Better Regulation Initiative, it is requesting that the Danish incumbent “simplify existing legislation and reduce administrative burdens for the 310,000 food and drink companies in Europe, 99.1% of which are SMEs.”Novel foods legislation The EU trade body also said it continues to regret the failure to reach an agreement on the novel foods regulation in March last year, claiming a detrimental impact on industry innovation as a result. The industry representatives are urging the Presidency to encourage the Commission to come forward with a new proposal without delay.Novel processes are also on the agenda of the Brussels-based group, which continues to seek a definition of nanotechnology.  “The food and drink industry is still at the R&D stages and the decision to use these and other new technologies will always be based on scientific research, regulatory compliance and consumer acceptance. FoodDrinkEurope finds it important that the definition as now included in the Consumer Information legislation will be included in the expected novel food revision,” added the food industry lobbyists.The trade body said the new Presidency should promote energy efficiency during its tenure, incentivizing energy efficient technologies such as combined heat and power. 
UK-based Tangerine Confectionery has added two Smith Kendon brands to its portfolio as it continues to expand through brand acquisitions.The company has acquired Smith Kendon Travel Sweets and York Fruits from private ownership.Financial details of the deal were not disclosed.UK fruit jelly giantThe company said that the York Fruits acquisition made it the UK market leader in fruit flavoured jellies. Together York Fruits and Tangerine’s existing brand Taveners Fruit Jellies take the top two spots within the category, it said. Tangerine added that the Smith Kendon travel sweet brand would complement its Taveners Travel Tin range which is primarily sold to export markets. It said the Smith Kendon brand had wide distribution in the major supermarkets as well as travel retail.Production of the new brands will take place in outsourced manufacturing facilities in mainland Europe. The company did not acquire new facilities with the transaction. It currently has seven factories, all in the UK.Alison Brand, marketing director for Tangerine Confectionery, said: “To be starting the new year bringing these two great brands in to our portfolio is a real coup for the business, particularly in such quick succession of Wham and Highland Toffee.”Recent brand acquisitions In October last year, Tangerine acquired Wham bar and Highland Toffee brands from McCowan’s for an undisclosed fee.The company, which is just five years old, has seen its turnover treble since its inception to around £160m (€194m).The new brandsSmith Kendon was acquired by Kraft in the Eighties before it was sold to The Wrigley Company in 2005.Private owners acquired the Smith Kendon travel sweet brand after Wrigley ditched the brand in 2006.The private owners then acquired York Fruits from Terry’s of York after it too faced extinction.The additions add to Tangerine’s portfolio, which includes Barratt, Butterkist and Henry Goode. 
QR codes that provide a wealth of information on sustainability could soon be common place on food productsIndustry must embrace and provide for mobile technologies, as ‘smart barcodes’ look set to replace the confusing mass of eco labels currently found on food products, says Organic Monitor. A question mark hangs over the future of existing eco-labels. With consumers across the globe becoming more technology and information savvy, the demand for more information on the sourcing and sustainability of food products is growing, says Organic Monitor.Such a swelling of interest in sustainability and sourcing information in recent years has led to an explosion in the number of on-pack ‘eco labels’, but has also led some brand owners to consider new solutions such as mobile technologies – which could soon lead to the demise of ‘eco labels’ on food packaging.Speaking to FoodNavigator.com, Amarjit Sahota, director of Organic Monitor, explained that with over 500 symbols and logos representing sustainable food products, many consumers are lost in the maze of eco-labels. “The big issue is there has been a proliferation of eco labels for food products,” he said. “To give an example, organic is the biggest eco label for foods, but there are around 200 or 300 logos to represent organic products," added Sahota.And he argues that the number of labels representing one system – such as organic – can confuse consumers. Step forward ‘smart barcodes’Advances in mobile technologies are increasing the number of consumer products with ‘smart barcodes’, with a growing number of consumers now turning to mobile applications to meet their informational needs. Devices such as Quick Response (QR) barcodes enable consumers to access a wealth of information on products from their smartphone including health and environmental data, explained Sahota. The US based ‘GoodGuide’ application gives ratings for almost 100,000 consumer products and companies, claims Organic Monitor. “The whole landscape is changing in the way that information is being given to consumers,” said Sahota.“Consumers are becoming more and more information savvy, and smart phones give them more information [to inform their] purchasing decision,” he added – noting that “quite a few retailers are advocating this system in the US. We believe it’s only a matter of time before it starts to take off in other countries too.”Industry actionThe Organic Monitor director explained that European manufacturers should now be looking to introduce smart barcodes to their products. “More and more companies are starting to do this, but not enough,” said Sahota.He also warned that the growth of mobile applications will mean that companies will need to be more transparent about sourcing and sustainability issues.“With more accountability in the industry, companies have to be more transparent and disclose where products and ingredients are sourced from, and what the carbon footprint of the product is.”“There is only so much information you can put on a label, and that’s the big advantage with mobile technology. Just by scanning a barcode you can get as much or as little information as you want on a product,” he explained. 
Cress seed gum (CSG) could be an interesting and promising thickener in food formulations, finds a new study from Iran. Given the hike in demand for hydrocolloids and their pricing volatility of late, particularly in relation to guar gum, the food industry is actively on the lookout for new sources of stabilizers and emulsifiers. And Lepidium sativum seed gum (garden cress seed) is a potential hydrocolloid substitute, said the Iranian food scientists. Writing in the journal Food Hydrocolloids, the team said the results of a study they conducted indicates that CSG is heat stable in all functional properties and the gum, suggest the authors, could be employed in industrial food processes involving high temperature such as cooking, pasteurization and sterilization. L. sativum is an annual herb belonging to the Cruciferae family, which grows widely in the Middle East, Europe and US. Its seeds, said the authors, absorb water quickly when soaked in water and produce a large amount of mucilaginous substances and a gum of high-molecular weight. Hydrocolloids, such as water soluble gums, have many functional properties tht make them useful in food applications with the ability to impart the required quality in terms of stability, texture and appearance. Plant hydrocolloids are long chain, high molecular weight, polymers that dissolve or disperse in water to give a thickening, stabilising or gelling effect – examples of such hydrocolloids are gaur gum, gum arabic, and xanthan gum. Emulsion and foaming attributes  Comparing xanthan gum (XG) and cress seed gum, the Iranian authors found that CSG presented lower viscosity than XG, but showed ‘desirable’ rheological, emulsifying and foaming properties. “When the hydrocolloid samples were heated, an irreversible increase in viscosity of cress seed gum solutions was observed and as a result, the emulsification and foaming properties improved,” said a team led by Seyed Razabi from the Food Hydrocolloids Research Centre at the Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Iran. CSG had high emulsifying capacity value (92%) at 25 C that was comparable to xanthan emulsifying capacity value, report the researchers. The effects of CSG on foaming properties in food systems, they added, are comparable with xanthan gum. But the hydrocolloid specialists said further investigation is required in order to fully understand the potential of cress seed derived gum.  Source: Food Hydrocolloids Title: Effect of thermal treatments on functional properties of cress seed (Lepidium sativum) and xanthan gums: A comparative study Published online ahead of print: .doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2011.11.012 Authors: S. Naji, S. Razavi, H Karazhiyan  
The European Commission has ordered a sales ban on a bar of soap deemed to be too similar to a chocolate bar.Israeli firm Sabon’s cube shaped soap "Sweet Bath Oil Bar" and its packaging has been judged to be much like a real bar of white chocolate following concerns raised by applicant country Romania.The Commission said: “The product poses a risk of choking as, due to its characteristic form, appearance, colour and size, (the small divided portions) the product may be mistaken for a foodstuff.“The word ‘chocolate’ is present on the packaging near a picture of a bath.The Commission said the product was not compliant with Directive 87/357/EEC, which relates to products that appear to be something else and could thus endanger the health and safety of consumers. 
High consumption of starchy foods may be linked with an increased risk of breast cancer tumours returning in women who have already had breast, according to a new study.The research –presented at the recent CTRC-AACR San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium – suggests that consumption of high carbohydrate starchy foods is associated with a greater risk for low-grade breast cancer recurrence. The research team warned that dietary modifications targeting starch intake in breast cancer patients, “warrant further investigation as a preventive measure.” "The results show that it's not just overall carbohydrates, but particularly starch," said Jennifer Emond, from the University of California, San Diego, USA, – who led the study."Women who increased their starch intake over one year were at a much likelier risk for recurring," she warned.Carb-cancer linkEmond and her colleagues noted that breast tumours over express hormone receptors known as insulin-like-growth-factor receptors (IGF-IR). These receptors are activated by growth factor hormones and help tumour cells to grow by increasing blood vessel formation. The researchers noted that expression of IGF-IR receptors has been related to tumour grade in cancer patients. They noted that dietary factors, particularly carbohydrate intake, have previously been suggested to stimulate activation of IGF-1R, therefore affecting the incidence and prognosis of cancer tumours. Research highlightsThe study included 2,651 women with breast cancer who from the Women's Healthy Eating and Living (WHEL) Dietary Intervention Trial. The team followed performed an annual check up with the women every year for an average of seven years – to assess diet and breast cancer recurrence status.Emond and her team found that, on average, women whose cancer returned over the study period consumed an average of 2.3 more grams per day of carbohydrates during the first year of the study – while women with no recurrence consumed an average of 2.7 fewer grams of carbohydrates per day over the first year.The team said that starches accounted for a big part of this change in carbohydrate intake, with Emond noting that changes in starch intake accounted for 48% of the variation in carbohydrate intake. In the first year of the study, they found that women who decreased starch consumption the most had a breast cancer recurrence rate of 9.7%, while women who increased their starch consumption the most had a breast cancer recurrence rate of 14.2%. However, after analysing patients by tumour grade, the team found the increased risk was limited to women with lower-grade tumours.Emond said the results highlight a need for more research on dietary recommendations that consider limited starch intake among women with breast cancer. 
World sugar prices are likely to stay high in 2012 due to external factors such as government policies, oil prices and instability in the Eurozone, according to the US Department of Agriculture (USDA).A USDA report ‘Post-Reform European Union Sugar – Prospects for the Future’ published late last month assessed past EU sugar reforms and analysed the challenges ahead for the EU as a consequence of further reforms in its new Common Agricultural Policy (CAP).The report  said: “It is likely that world sugar prices will remain higher than in the past when the original reform measures were being considered.”Government policies“The Indian production cycle and government policies are the main source contributing to an expected continuation of world sugar price variability. Government policies that intervene in sugar markets are assumed to continue,” it said.Projections from the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) from 2011/12 through to 2020/21 put the average price for sugar at $518.5 (€405.9) per tonne, 48% higher than the $349.5 (€273.6) per tonne average from the earlier period. “The figure shows future price volatility, with a low of $464.1 (€363.3) per tonne in 2012/13 and a high of $608.7 (€476.5) per tonne in 2015/16,” said the report.“Low prices are expected in 2012/13 and 2013/14 that make a case for retaining the quota system during the period in which quota is being debated,” it continued.Eurozone and EU expansionThe report added that another influence affecting prices was instability in the Eurozone. “The European Union would be in strong competition for the Sub-Saharan African exports unless the euro appreciates above projected levels,” it said. “Looking ahead, the value of the Euro and increased demand from emerging market economies will likely have strong effects on EU sugar markets that policymakers cannot afford to ignore.”The report added that the likely enlargement of the EU to include Croatia and Serbia could also impact the sugar market.“They [Croatia and Serbia] have been granted loans to improve their sugar infrastructure and could become more efficient producers that could add to greater self-sufficiency in EU sugar production in an EU of 30 member states.”Influence of oilAccording to the report a lack of risk management policies in the EU, unlike in other regions, mean the next CAP reform will likely address the price volatility issue, though many factors will still affect sugar prices.“Oil price changes affect world sugar prices by influencing trade-offs in producing either sugar or ethanol in Brazil,” said the report.Brazil is the world’s largest sugarcane producer and can choose use its produce either for sugar production or ethanol production.“When the world price of oil is high, Brazil has more incentive to produce ethanol and less sugar. Reduced sugar exports contribute to higher world sugar prices.”“Conversely, when world oil prices drop, less ethanol is produced and more sugar is available to the world, thereby lowering the world price.”The European Commission released its proposals for CAP reforms on 12 October 2011.It is now up to the European Parliament and the Council to approve the regulations, which is expected by the end of 2013. If all goes to plan, the CAP reforms would take effect on the 1 January 2014. 
The role milk sugar lactose and its derivatives play in the human diet is often ‘misunderstood, underestimated and undervalued’, according to a new paper in the International Dairy Journal (IDJ).Introducing a special February issue of the journal examining the nutrition and health aspects of lactose and its derivatives, International Dairy Federation (IDF) action team chair Michael Gänzle and his fellow authors wrote:“Lactose is far more than a source of dietary energy. This milk sugar also helps to boost calcium absorption in the mammalian body, and derivatives such as lactulose have been shown to exert a number of physiological effects, including the promotion of bifidobacteria in the intestine.”The calcium absorption claim, for instance, is supported by paper exploring this issue published in the same issue of the IDJ, by H.S Kwak, W-J Lee and M.R Lee, ‘Revisiting lactose as an enhancer of calcium absorption’ .The scientists noted that although the stimulating effect of lactose on calcium absorption was clear in animal studies, in humans the exact absorption/retention mechanism was still not clearly identified, and thus the same effect was “still controversial”. Kwak, Lee and Lee wrote: “Part of this uncertainty can probably be attributed to the design of several studies in which control sugars (e.g. glucose, galactose [its component monosaccharides]) used for comparison with lactose also enhance calcium absorption.”Calcium absorption claim supportDespite calling for future research lactose absorption/retention, the team concluded: “Lactose does have a significant (P<0.05) effect on the absorption of calcium when compared with either non-absorbable sugars such as mannitol, or to a high molecular weight carbohydrate source, such as cornstarch.”More generally, Gänzle et al. speculated that perhaps one reason why lactose was undervalued stemmed from concerns about dietary intolerance.They wrote: “Although many people lose their ability to digest lactose after childhood, scientific studies show that most people can consume milk with a meal and not suffer any adverse effects."Moreover, traditional dairy products such as ripened cheeses were virtually lactose-free, the authors said, while technological advances in dairy processing had led to the introduction of many lactose-free products.Caries-causing potential rebuffedQuestions raised about the dental caries or tooth decay-causing potential of lactose were also misplaced, Gänzle et al. suggested, since lactose had been “widely accepted as the least cariogenic of dietary sugars over the years”.Concerns were partly due to the effect of organic acid metabolites – produced during lactose fermentation – on tooth enamel – they added.“However, as with so many nutrition-related matter, it is easy to lose sight of the fact that people consume whole foods and not pure substances. Humans would not ordinarily consume pure lactose," the authors wrote.“They normally consume lactose within dairy and other foods, and these foods also contain a wide range of other nutrients including proteins, fats, vitamins and minerals, which buffer the effect of lactose and thus offer protection from cariogenicity.”The team added that a review of lactose cariogenicity with special reference to childhood dental caries formed part of the IDJ's February issue.Title: ‘Nutrition and health aspects of lactose and its derivatives: state of the science’Authors: M.Gänzle, J.Bryans, P.Jelen, G.SmithersSource: International Dairy Journal, Vol. 22, Issue 2 (February 2012), Published online ahead of print: doi:10.1016/j.idairyj.2011.11.001 
The majority of European consumers do not attain the fruit and vegetable intake levels recommended by the Wold Health Organisation, according to the European Food Information Council (EUFIC).The review, published by EUFIC, concludes that most European citizens do not reach Wold Health Organisation (WHO) recommendations to consume more than 400 grams of vegetables and fruit per day - but highlights that intakes vary among European regions, with intakes higher in Southern EU countries compared to the Northern regions.Despite highlighting issues limiting the possibility to assess fruit and vegetable intake on a European level, the report reveals that there are some consistent findings on consumption patterns in Europe – noting that fruit and vegetable consumption patterns are determined by a wide range of factors including: age, gender and socio-economic status.EUFIC said the influence of these factors “seems to be mediated by other factors” including food preferences, knowledge, skills and affordability.Healthy dietFruit and vegetables form an important part a healthy, balanced diet – either as part of a meal or snack. They provide a good source of vitamins, minerals and fibre, in addition to supplying biologically active secondary metabolites such as phytochemicals – that have been suggested to be beneficial for health. EUFIC noted that research has shown that high intakes of fruit and vegetables are associated with a lower risk of chronic diseases; particularly, cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, and certain cancers (such as those of the mouth, pharynx, larynx, stomach and lungs).The WHO recommends consuming at least 400 grams of fruits and vegetables – not counting potatoes and other starchy tubers – per day. The report notes that in Europe recommendations for consumption vary between countries, but in general, “are in line with the WHO recommendation,” with countries, such as Denmark, recommend higher amounts such as 600 grams per day.Meeting the standardEUFIC noted that certain elements of previous initiatives to increase consumption – a priority for international organisations as well as national governments – been shown to improve fruit and vegetable intake across populations.The report noted that initiatives that have been positive have lasted at least 12 months – adding that multi-component strategies addressing both personal factors, such as knowledge and skills, as well as the physical and social environment have proved most successful. The full report from EUFIC can be found by following this link .  
Flavour house JV to get closer to China's domestic marketFrench flavour manufacturer, Aromatech, has formed a joint venture with a large Chinese flavour and fragrance company in a bid to better access China’s domestic food and beverages sector.The joint venture, Shanghai Apple Aromatech Flavors Technology, will house a research and development laboratory of 200 scientists in Shanghai.Benoît Martel, general manager at Aromatech, told FoodNavigator-Asia that the alliance combines the market-leading position and industrial performance of the Chinese company, Apple Flavor & Fragrance, with the technical expertise of Aromatech.Win-win“It is a win-win partnership,” Martel explained, one that will be able to create high-quality flavours for the sweet and savoury application food sectors as well as the beverage industry.“It is important to keep the Chinese proximity, with the best service and business relationship provided to local customers,” he said, something the joint venture entity will offer.Apple Flavor & Fragrance has a network of around 1,000 distributors and is recognised as the leading flavour company in China, and so specific objectives and visions for the Chinese market will be more easily achieved with their input, Martel noted.Flavours for…“Our target customers are the food and drink companies in China, mainly involved in the dairy and beverages industries,” he said.However, he added that products will be developed for other application sectors such as confectionary, biscuits and prepared meals.The Chinese market is also looking for international and “trendy tastes”, which is something that the combined expertise and high technological value bought by the joint venture can deliver, Martel said.He relayed the quality control benefits of manufacturing to both European and Chinese standards, which would ensure, “quality and traceability”.Natural and organic flavours will also feature in the JV’s portfolio.The joint venture will target not only China’s domestic market but also Chinese companies exporting worldwide. 
US Pharmacopeia has drafted new ingredient quality standards for inclusion in the Food Chemicals Codex (FCC), for probiotics, steviol glycosides, benzoates, infant formula and flavoring ingredients, and is seeking industry comments.The FCC is a compendium of ingredient monographs and tests to ensure the quality, purity and safety of more than 1,100 food ingredients. USP is the non-governmental, non-profit authority responsible for setting those standards and publishing the FCC compendium.Among the new standards, USP said that strong consumer interest in probiotics and new applications incorporating probiotics led to the development of a new FCC Appendix, Microbial Food Cultures Including Probiotics.“Testing for identity is difficult with probiotics, and this is a key area where public standards provided in the Food Chemicals Codex can be of significant value across the food, nutritional and consumer products industries,” said USP’s chief science officer Praveen Tyle. “These are standards that all parties can use. With more manufacturers incorporating probiotics in products beyond yogurts based on rising consumer interest, scrutiny of health claims will grow, as will global sourcing of ingredients. We believe additional measures for determining identity and overall quality will be useful in protecting consumers and manufacturers alike.”The draft standards include testing to confirm probiotic identity, purity and microbe count, to ensure product safety, as well as authenticity of health claims.USP has also proposed new standards for several steviol glycosides, the sweet components from the stevia leaf. Although it has already developed a monograph for rebaudioside A (reb A), a new monograph extends to other stevia-derived ingredients, which it says increasingly are being used in foods and beverages.“An important component of the standard is a newly developed method capable of separating and measuring all nine glycosides—which has been difficult in the past,” USP said.Other proposed standards include those for three benzoates, in order to address concerns about economically motivated adulteration. Calcium benzoate, potassium benzoate and sodium benzoate are widely used as preservatives.And USP has also proposed standards for 11 food flavoring agents, and infant formula ingredients, including a range of micronutrients.The draft standards are available online here  and are open for comment until March 31, 2012. 
Nestle UK has announced today that it is to move its head offices from Croydon to a site near Gatwick by the end of 2012.The company had been present in Croydon for almost 50 years, but decided it would be too difficult to redevelop the site and therefore has sought a more modern building.The new site, No.1 City Place, is in a newly built business park in Crawley and is very near to Gatwick Airport with good links to London. The business park comprises from 18,772 to 126,573 sq ft headquarter offices.Mod consNestle UK said in a statement: “The company has been seeking a new Head Office in Croydon for several years. However, it has proved very difficult either to redevelop the company’s current offices, or to identify an alternative location that meets its needs.”A Nestle spokesperson told ConfectioneryNews.com that the new headquarters was very different to its existing offices because it was spread across just four storeys, compared to Croydon’s 22 storeys.She said the 840 office based staff in Croydon would be moved to the new site, but said the move would not necessarily mean new jobs would be created.She was asked the cost of the investment but declined to comment.She also refused to confirm what would become of the Croydon offices.Paul Grimwood, Nestle UK & Ireland chairman and CEO said: “This move represents an exciting new chapter for Nestle in the UK. We are investing across the UK to establish our next generation of world class facilities. Our new Head Office will provide a modern, efficient and attractive workplace for our people, in an ideal location,” he said. BackgroundDespite statements from Nestle that said it was pushing for a move from Croydon, it was speculated in May lasy year that the company may keep its head offices in the area and move to a £500m development at Ruskin Square (Croydon Gateway).Croydon Borough Council was keen to keep Nestle in the area as the company is one of the largest employers in the Borough.However, Nestle’s statement last year said that “it has become increasingly clear that our current offices and the deteriorating environment around them do not provide a suitable base for our business or our employees in the medium term”.It therefore said that it was “forced” to consider options outside Croydon. 
Ingredients firm Frutarom has acquired British company Savoury Flavours in a €4.6m ($5.8m) deal.Savoury Flavours recorded turnover of €5.1m ($6.6m) in 2011, a 28% increase on the previous year.The company was founded in 1999 and supplies flavours for the snack food, sauce and prepared meals sectors of the UK and export food industry.The firm has industrial units in Manningtree, Essex UK and occupies a 1,050m2 of racked warehousing across 10 units that features sampling laboratories and an applications kitchen.The site is near another manufacturing site which Frutarom gained when it acquired British East Anglian Food Ingredients (EAFI) in February last year for (EAFI) for €3.7m ($4.8m).The proximity of the two companies, which have similar product portfolios, is expected to allow for synergies between Savoury Flavours and Frutarom's savoury activities worldwide.Strengthening savoury segmentOri Yehudai, president and CEO of Frutarom said, "Frutarom is opening 2012 with an additional acquisition, which continues to strengthen its activities in the savoury segment in Europe and in developing markets.” “This is an additional step towards strengthening Frutarom's position in the UK market, where Frutarom in currently a leading sweet flavours manufacturer,” he added.He said there had been changes in consumer behaviour that had caused increased demand for processed and conscience foods. Frutarom, he said, has therefore identified the savoury segment as a growth driver."The acquisition of Savoury Flavours, following previous acquisitions, is an additional step towards strengthening Frutarom's leadership in this important segment,” he said. Further acquisitions plannedFrutarom's has boosted its savoury portfolio in recent years with bolt-on acquisitions including Nesse in 2006, Gewurzmuller in 2007 and Chr. Hansen’s meat blends business in 2009.Yehudai confirmed further acquisitions were planned.“We intend to continue to invest in the substantial expansion of our activities in the savoury segment in additional destinations throughout the world, including through further acquisitions,” he said. 
New FAO chief Jose Graziano da Silva forecasts further volatility in food markets this yearCurrent volatility in food markets is likely to continue however prices could begin to ease into 2012, according to the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)Food prices may begin to ease in 2012 but are unlikely to drop drastically from the high levels reached last year, according to new FAO chief Jose Graziano da Silva. The recently appointed director-general, who is set for a three-and-a-half year tenure at the top, said volatility in food markets was likely to continue throughout the forthcoming year, adding that more people would be at risk of hunger due to economic instability."Prices will not be going up as in the last two to three years but will also not drop down. There may be some reductions but not so drastic, in the short term," said Graziano da Silva. "Volatility will remain, that is clear," he stated.Price indexGlobal food prices measured by the FAO hit a peak last February, and have been falling since last June when crops improved and concerns about the economy slowed demand growth.The recent high price of food has fuelled rises inflation and was said to be a major factor in civil unrest that led to the protests and demonstrations across the Middle East and North Africa – often referred to as the Arab Spring.Wider fundingThe FAO head said he did not expect the economic slowdown in Europe to impact funding for FAO projects, because the amount countries donated was such a small proportion of gross domestic product that they were unlikely to cut it. However he noted that economic problems were likely to increase the number of people at risk of hunger in the world – which the organization estimated at 925 million people in 2010."We will have more work to do, with more people hungry, more people unemployed, and we will need new ways to assist them," he said. 
 The European Association of Craft, Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (UEAPME) has stated its support for industry members opposed to ‘burdensome’ food taxes introduced by some European nations.The comments from the SME association come days after it was announced that French authorities have approved a new levy on sugar sweetened drinks in the country. The association said it supports its national members in their opposition to additional taxes on foods thought to be ‘unhealthy’.“UEAPME believes that such taxes should be resisted as there is no evidence they stop people eating the foods, they would be felt most by low income families and positive encouragement towards a healthy diet is much more effective,” said the association. “They do not prevent obesity,” it said.Fat taxIn the last year legislators across Europe have began to put additional taxes on foods thought to be unhealthy – the so called ‘fat tax’ – in an effort to combat rising obesity levels.Authorities in Denmark, Hungary, Finland, and France have already introduced a tax on such items, whilst Belgium, Ireland, Romania and Sweden are said to be actively considering a levy.However, the UEAPME noted that recent research suggests there is very little evidence to support the idea that people may be encouraged to change their eating habits through taxation. The association argued that taxes are not an appropriate tool to promote healthy eating, and can be seen as no more than an invention to generate additional income for the national budget. The UEAPME added that selective taxation of certain foods could distort the European market. The association argued that whilst some national authorities have said the measures are justified by European legislation, such legislation does not exist.Industry oppositionIn addition to SME opposition, many larger industry members have stated their opposition to ‘sin taxes’ – arguing that it is unfair. Earlier this year Coca-Cola Enterprises said it opposed the proposed French soda tax, and suspended plans for a 17million euro investment in one of its plants in the south of France. The company said pulling out of the investment was "a symbolic protest against a tax that punishes our company and stigmatises our products."“We’re not in favour of this kind of discriminatory tax, and we wish they were not there,” explained Coca-Cola Enterprises’ European president Hubert Patricot. 
Research into the production of colloid systems with lemon oil could have “important implications” for the production of more economical emulsions in the food and beverage industry, say researchers.The study – published in Food Research International  – offers insights into the optimal processing conditions for the production of colloidal dispersions with lemon oil. The research team, led by Professor Julian McClements from the University of Massachusetts , USA, studied the influence of lemon oil type and surfactant-to-oil ratio on properties of colloidal dispersions – finding that the surfactant-to-oil ratio determines whether emulsions or micro-emulsions are formed. The team added that the type of lemon oil used and storage temperatures have strong influences on the long term stability of these emulsions.“This study provides useful information for the rational design of food grade colloidal delivery systems for encapsulating flavour oils and other functional lipids for application in foods and beverages,” said the authors, They added that the study will help industry design and fabricate better colloidal delivery systems that could be suitable for the encapsulation of functional lipophilic components.Economic processingMcClements and his team explained that there is a need to understand how to formulate effective colloidal delivery systems from food-grade ingredients using economic processing conditions. “These delivery systems must have suitable physicochemical and sensory properties for the product they are incorporated into (e.g., optical clarity, flavor profile, rheology), and they must remain stable throughout the shelf-life of the product,” they said.The most common oil phases used to prepare soft drinks are flavour oils, such as lemon and orange oils, noted the research team. They added that whilst a number of previous studies have focused on the chemical and physical stability of colloidal systems containing citrus oils, their new study focused on dispersions containing lemon oils. Research highlightsThe research team investigated the influence of lemon oil type (either 1-fold or 4-fold) and concentration on the formation and stability of colloidal dispersions prepared using a food-grade surfactant (Tween 80). “In particular, we wanted to identify conditions for forming either micro-emulsions or nano-emulsions using these materials,” explained McClements.The team found the influence of surfactant-to-oil ratio and oil type “had a pronounced influence on the nature of the colloidal dispersions formed, as well as on their storage stability.”They added that transparent colloidal systems were formed at high surfactant-to-oil ratios, whilst turbid dispersions formed at lower ratios. “Our results suggest that the solubilisation of lemon oil droplets by surfactant micelles may be a slow process whose rate depends on oil type and storage temperature,” said McClements and his team – noting that solubilisation rates appeared to increase from 4 to 32 °C, and was faster for 4-fold than 1-fold lemon oil. “We also found that all of the colloidal dispersions formed were unstable to droplet growth when stored at elevated temperatures (55 °C), which can be attributed to accelerated Ostwald ripening and/or coalescence processes,” they added. McClements said the results “have important implications” for the production of stable emulsions for use in the beverage industry. Source: Food Research International Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1016/j.foodres.2011.12.017 “Fabrication and Stability of Colloidal Delivery Systems for Flavor Oils: Effect of Composition and Storage Conditions”Authors: K. Ziani, Y. Fang, D.J. McClements 
UK-based polymer firm Revolymer has gained novel foods approval in the EU for a gum base that degrades faster than conventional bases and is seeking commercial partners to launch chewing gum products in the EU.Rev7 is a synthetic polymer made up of branched polymers of monomethoxypolyethylene glycol (MPEG) grafted onto polyisoprene-graft-maleic anhydride (PIP-g-MA), and unreacted MPEG.It is the first polymer to be approved as a chewing gum base in 30 years.Gums with Rev7 can degrade between two to three months in drains and in less than two years on pavements.Commercial partners soughtRevolymer CEO Roger Pettman told ConfectioneryNews.com that his company was looking for partners to commercialise products in Central Europe, Eastern Europe and Asia.“Theoretically, it can be used in every gum base in the EU,” he said.He added that the company had received approaches to service products in some parts of the EU, but said Revolymer would prefer to make the base available to the industry as a whole to reduce the environmental impact of gum littering rather than work with just one manufacturer.The company plans to serve the UK and US directly. Pettman said he expected Revolymer’s Rev7 gum to be on shelves in the UK by in the first half of this year.Already selling in USRevolymer has sold Rev7 gums in the US since 2010 after it declared self-GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe) status. The company has since gained GRAS status in the US and affirmation from the US Food and Administration. (see here )It has gums in peppermint and spearmint flavours in almost 500 chains in the US and has commitment from around 5,000 stores.Pettman said that sales were going well and in line with expectations.The company has not yet gained novel foods approval in Asia, but Pettman said this would be the next stage.Cost of manufactureAccording to the CEO the cost of manufacturing Rev7 gum is comparable to producing regular gum.However, he said some modification was needed such as removing some of the waxes out of the chewing gum and varying constituents.Pettman said that Revolymer has a composition of matter patent on the polymer itself, meaning it owns the polymer. It also holds a patent for the process. (see here )Four year struggleThe company submitted an application for Rev7 in 2007 and received final approval on 21 December 2011 following a positive scientific opinion from EFSA  in March last year.EFSA’s opinion was sought after reasoned objections were raised in 2009 over potential toxicological concerns because test data was considered by some to be incomplete.Following final approval, chewing gums with a Rev7 base may now be placed on the market in the European Union up to a maximum of 8 %. (Decision available here )Potential competitionIn November, Irish researchers patented a process for a non-sticky, biodegradable gum base that uses cereal proteins. Its developers are also looking for companies to commercialise products made using the base. (see here )Pettman acknowledged that other gum bases with similar functions had been created, but did not expect products containing these bases to hit the market for several years. 
Comax Flavors has released its predictions for 2012 flavor combination trends under four categories: Ethnic Fusion, Pickled Paradise, Wine Whimsy and Regional Reverie.Based on its Culinary Trend Exchange data gathered from flavor experts during 2011, Comax said: “These one-of-a-kind melds bring pizzazz to the world of flavors, introducing the tongue-tickling mingling of exotic flavors, fruits and spices, infused with seductive notes reminiscent of faraway lands.” Ethnic Fusion includes jasmine coconut, curry mole, Asian taco and fiery mango pineapple chutney. Pickled Paradise takes inspiration from Asian pickling, the company said, with pickled mango, pickled jalapeno, kimchi, pickled watermelon and pickled ginger with wasabi. Wine Whimsy includes Japanese plum wine, Italian muscato wine, sauvignon blanc wine, and Spanish madeira wine. And within the Regional Reverie category are herbs of Provence, lemon parsley, Thai basil or garlic basil, and ginger rosemary.  
Better defining the relationship between chemical structure and digestibility of under-used natural sugars could help industry to produce a new generation of “designer” sweeteners, say researchers.The study – published in Food Chemistry  – assessed various naturally occurring sugars (oligosaccharides) for oral and intestinal digestibility, to test the influence of chemical structure on functional properties and measure their potential as new alternative sweeteners.The research team, led by Anne Rae of University of Queensland, Australia, explained that increasing concerns about the effects of dietary sugars has bought about a growing interest in alternative sugars as sweeteners. “The results will be important for predicting the value of naturally occurring sugars as non-calorific sweeteners and may also be used to inform combinatorial chemistry strategies to produce “designer” sweeteners,” explained Rae and her team.“Advances in controlled carbohydrate synthesis through improved enzyme engineering techniques or use of microbial synthesis, may enable the development of novel functional food ingredients based on these principles,” they said.Sweet demandOne of the main suggested causes for rising levels of obesity and type 2 diabetes is increasing consumption of sugar-rich processed foods. However, speaking at the International Sweetener Association (ISA) conference last year, ISA chairman Hans Heezen told FoodNavigator that the desire to eat sweet things should not be suppressed, but rather managed to allow consumers to enjoy the taste of products without the worry of unnecessary calories.“Our desire for sweet taste is an essential and basic human characteristic - cutting out sweet foods and drinks is incredibly hard for most people so they're just not going to do it,” said Heezen.As a result the food industry has begun to replace sugars with alternative sweeteners – many of which are non-calorific. Rae and her team noted that in the food industry, sugars add not only provide sweetness, “but also colour, texture and preservation qualities.” They said that finding alternatives that match all of these functions can be difficult for industry. Oligosaccharide analysisWhilst many alternative sugars exist in the market, including sugars with low, or no, calorific value, there are many other naturally-occurring sugars that are not currently in commercial production, said the researchers.“It is likely that some of these sugars will also display properties that would make them useful alternative sweeteners,” they argued. “Although the major dietary sugars have been well studied, there are still many questions about the oral and intestinal utilization of potential novel sweeteners,” said Rae. “Desirable properties for an alternative sweetener include low energy content due to low absorption or digestibility, and non-cariogenicity as a result of poor metabolism by oral bacteria, while ideally retaining solubility, texture (“mouth-feel”), crystallinity and bulking properties,” they explained. Research detailsIn the new research, the team reported that utilisation of oligosaccharides by oral microorganisms and intestinal enzymes are important factors in determining their effectiveness as alternative sweeteners. “In conjunction with other tests of physical and sensory properties, knowledge of the structures that are non-cariogenic and/or non-calorific will be useful in the selection and design of alternative sweeteners,” they said.The sucrose isomers, α-glucobioses, β-glucobioses and sucrose-based oligosaccharides, structures were identified by the research team as ones that are not broken down by oral bacteria, “and would therefore contribute to the non-cariogenic potential of a sweetener.”They said that results showed oligosaccharides containing a (1→6)-β-Glc group, including gentiobiose and gentiobiitol, together with melezitose, were resistant to digestion by both oral bacteria and mammalian intestinal enzymes, “highlighting their potential as dietary sugar substitutes.” Source: Food Chemistry Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2011.12.031 “Oral and intestinal digestion of oligosaccharides as potential sweeteners; a systematic evaluation”Authors: J. Hodoniczky, C.A. Morris, A.L. Rae 
European food ingredient manufacturers Savena Group and Sfinc Group have agreed a merger deal that will see the new group become a leading provider of food ingredient mixes, say Savena.The merger of the two companies, to now be known as Savena Sfinc, will nearly double the size of Savena and significantly increase its geographic footprint, said the company.The company said the combination of French based Savena and Belgium based Sfinc will generate significant revenues and purchasing synergies, broaden product offerings, and further pool the existing technologies and expertise of the respective teams.“The merger of our two companies will allow the combined group to generate significant synergies developed by teams with a common vision. In addition, the combined R&D and expertise will benefit clients of both companies,” said Chris De Wolf, CEO of Sfinc.“The new group will become a leading player in France, Belgium, Holland, Sweden and Germany with a strong export strategy for the rest of Europe and Asia," he said.New marketsSavena CEO Eric Terré also welcomed the merger, explaining that the deal will open new European markets for the company, “in particular the Benelux area.” “The nature of our respective client bases, our complementary geographical reach, and the potential to rationalise our industrial footprint and to produce a wide range of synergies means both companies are an ideal fit geographically and strategically” he explained.Savena supplies a wide range of texture and flavour solutions and mixes to industry and catering firms across Europe, whilst the Sfinc group manufactures supplies spices, sauces, marinades and functional food mixes for agro-food businesses. Both groups manufacture and produce their ingredient mixes for clients across Europe, and are said to have a ‘robust’ growth track-record – achieving double-digit growth rates in 2011.  
Protein intake has no affect on fat deposits,but may alter energy metabolism, say the researchers.Calorie consumption alone is responsible for increase in body fat, whilst protein intake may contribute to changes in energy expenditure, according to new research.The study – published in JAMA – reports that when overeating, calories alone contribute to increases in body fat. In contrast, protein contributes to the changes in energy expenditure and lean body mass, but does not play a role in the increased in body fat.“The key finding of this study is that calories are more important than protein while consuming excess amounts of energy with respect to increases in body fat,” explained the research team, led by Dr George Bray of the Pennington Biomedical Research Center, USA.In an accompanying editorial , Dr Zhaoping Li and his colleagues from the University of California, Los Angeles, stated that the results of this study "suggest that overeating low protein diets may increase fat deposition leading to loss of lean body mass despite lesser increases in body weight.” They argued that policy makers need to understand the role of the Western diet in promoting overweight and obesity. “Because this diet increases the risks of over-nutrition through fat deposition beyond that detected by body mass index, the method used to assess the current obesity epidemic and the magnitude of the obesity epidemic may have been underestimated,” they said.Metabolic shiftsObesity has become a major international public health concern. The authors noted that over 60% of adults in the USA are categorised as overweight, whilst more than 30% are obese.Bray and his team explained that although many people are overweight or obese, there is a significant number of people who despite overeating have normal weight and do not become overweight or obese. “These differences may reflect differences in the way individuals handle the food they eat each day both during weight gain and weight loss,” argued the researchers, noting that “the concept that when people overeat, the amount of weight gain is highly individual, has intrigued medical science for a century."Previous research has suggested such a phenomenon may be due to macronutrient composition and responses to overfeeding – with various human studies supporting the view that when people overeat a diet that contains either high or low protein, they are less “metabolically efficient” than diets of average protein intake.The new study aimed to determine whether levels of dietary protein differentially affected body composition, weight gain, or energy expenditure “under tightly controlled conditions in a randomized controlled trial.”Study detailsThe team randomised 25 healthy people, living in a controlled setting, to consume diets or varying protein levels. Participants were randomised to receive diets containing 5% energy from protein (low protein), 15% (normal protein), or 25% (high protein) – which they were overfed for 8 weeks. Bray and his colleagues reported that all participants in the study gained weight – with no differences by sex. They found that the rate of weight gain in the low protein diet group was significantly less than in the other two groups.The researchers explained that their data is consistent with previous findings, and implies “that a diet providing only 5% of energy from protein was metabolically different with a higher energy cost of weight gain compared with diets that contained 15% and 25% of energy from protein.” However, the team noted that calories alone, contributed to the increases in body fat witnessed, whilst protein contributed to the changes in energy expenditure and lean body mass, “but not to the increase in body fat.”You watch a video of Dr Bray explaining his findings by clicking here . Source: JAMA Volume 307, Number 1, Pages 47-55, doi: 10.1001/jama.2011.1918 “Effect of Dietary Protein Content on Weight Gain, Energy Expenditure, and Body Composition During Overeating: A Randomized Controlled Trial”Authors: George A. Bray, Steven R. Smith, Lilian de Jonge, Hui Xie, Jennifer Rood, Corby K. Martin, et al 
The world’s foremost supplier of gelatine to the confectionery industry Rousselot has acquired North American gelatine manufacturer Eastman Gel.Rousselot’s parent company VION sealed the deal last Friday from the Eastman Kodak Company. Financial details were not disclosed.Eastman Gel, based in Peabody, Massachusetts, employs 95 people and produces 5,500 tonnes of gelatine annually.Closer to customersMarc van der Lee, director corporate communications at VION, told ConfectionerNews.com: “With this acquisition we have the possibility to strengthen our position in this part of the market of North America.”While Roussolet is the market leading gelatine producer in Europe and Asia-Pacific it is currently positioned second in North America.Van der Lee said that the acquisition would give Rousselot “a better foothold in the local market” and mean the company was present in “the direct neighbourhood” of its customers.Increased capacityRousselot already has a presence in North America with a production site in Dubuque, Iowa.Throughout its 12 facilities worldwide manned by 2,400 employees the company currently produces 80,000 tonnes of gelatine annually, up over 70% since 2000.The Eastman Gel acquisition is expected to further boost production capacity by around 7%.Eastman Gel also manufactures gelatine for companies outside the confectionery industry. VION said that it expected the acquisition to strengthen Rousselot’s position in growing pharma-markets and its current position in the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).Van der Lee was asked whether some of its new customers in North America could be confectionery firms, but he refused to be drawn on information about customers.Rousselot forms part of international ingredients firm VION, which has an annual turnover of € 8.9bn and employs 26.500 staff worldwide. The company is the leading gelatine supplier worldwide with a 25% market share. 
Replacing wheat flour with lupin flour by up to 30% can increase protein and dietary fibre content without affecting taste, colour, texture and flavour, according to researchers in Australia.The study ‘Effect of lupin flour incorporation on the physical and sensory properties of muffins’ published in Quality Assurance and Safety of Crops & Foods said that substituting with lupin flour was cheaper than other natural protein and dietary fibre sources and could boost the nutritional value of muffins.Sweet lupin is a grain legume grown in Australia, Europe and South America and contains high amounts of soluble and insoluble dietary fibre.The research was conducted by Syed M Nasar-Abbas and Vijay Jayasena at Curtin University of Technology in Perth, Australia. Boost nutritional profile“Muffins are popular as breakfast or snacks in advanced nations but poor in nutritional value by having low protein and dietary fibre content,” said the study.“By replacing wheat flour with lupin flour at 30% level in muffin formulation, substantial improvement in the protein and fibre contents can be achieved without affecting physical and sensory properties,” it said.CheaperThe researchers added that lupin flour was cheaper than other alternatives used to boost nutritional profiles such as flaxseed meal, oat bran and potato peel.“Studies showed that the use of these kinds of dietary fibres resulted in poor-quality food products, including deterioration in appearance, flavour and texture,” they said. “Substitution of sweet lupin flour would improve the nutritional value and quality of muffins at an economically affordable price,” they concluded. Method and resultsThe researchers in the current study prepared muffins replacing wheat flour with lupin flour between 10% to 50% levels. The muffins were stored for seven days and compared with a control sample (a standard muffin recipe) for changes in physiochemical and sensory properties.They found that muffins below 30% in lupin flour showed an improvement in colour and notice no significant effect on most textural parameters and no significant changes in taste, flavour and moisture.However, they did note an increase in hardness and reduction in springiness, though similar changes were seen with the control sample.Another study  in Australia earlier this year found that an intake of flour with 40% lupin flour in place of conventional wholemeal flour could significantly reduce the risk of heart disease.Source: Nasar-Abbas SM, Jayasena V (2012) ‘Effect of lupin flour incorporation on the physical and sensory properties of muffins’ Quality Assurance and Safety of Crops & Foods. 
Pro-breast feeding advocates and Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) are throwing their support behind mooted amendments to the European Union PARNUTS Directive they believe can improve the safety, quality and marketing transparency of infant formulas and other products.Liberal Belgian MEP and rapporteur, Frédérique Ries, concluded in a recent European Parliament Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety (ENVI) report that amendments can help ensure the quality and safety of infant food products in the EU.“Infants, children under three years of age and people for whom a special diet is vital on medical grounds clearly require special attention and uniform treatment within the EU,” she wrote in the report.The PARNUTS (Foods for particular nutritional purposes) Directive that governs labelling in foods such as dietetic, sports and infant foods is up for review with the European Commission stating it wants to, “provide better information to consumers” with amendments to a piece of legislation that first entered EU law books in 1977.The proposed amendments will reduce the coverage of PARNUTS to abolish the notion of dietetic foods as these have been cannibalised by functional food offerings administered by other legislation including gluten-free foods, sports foods and slimming products.Not far enoughBut they also seek to, “strengthen provisions on foods for vulnerable population groups that need particular protection e.g. infants and children up to 3 years old.”  This aim has won the support of UK pro-breast milk group, Baby Milk Action (BMA), although its policy director, Patty Rundall, OBE, told NutraIngredients this morning that the EC proposed amendments did not go far enough.“We need to know that the procedures are as safe as possible and these amendments are a step in the right direction but they do not go far enough,” Rundall said. “We want more than the EC wants.”Rundall’s group would like to see stricter scrutiny of the safety and quality of some constituents before they are approved for use in infant formulas and follow-on milks, and believe any PARNUTS amendments could spur changes to EU Directives specifically governing infant formulas and follow-on milks.In league with others like the UK-based Baby Feeding Law Group, and the International Baby Food Action Network, the BMA has long been a critic of EU laws they say are too lax and out of step with United Nations infant food guidelines.They are particularly opposed to the discriminatory addition of certain ingredients that differentiate products, believing that if a nutrient is scientifically backed to provide a baby health benefit, it should be made mandatory in all products.In this sense they are concerned that the EC proposals seek to, “keep current compositional and labelling rules for infant and follow-on formulae, processed cereal-based foods and other baby foods and foods for special medical purposes”.Growing up milkThere is also concern about how “growing up milks” – those targeted at older infants and children – will be classified, with the EC’s Basil Mathioudakis hinting that they will require validation of their ‘growing up’ benefits under the 2006 EU nutrition and health claims regulation (NHCR).Swedish Green MEP Carl Schylter, who also sat on the PARNUTS ENVI committee, called growing up milk “an absurd concept....it is cows’ milk with additives”.Last year the German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR) found protein manipulation and addition of fatty acids, vitamins and minerals in growing up milks did not deliver nutritional bonuses to infants compared to normal dairy milk. 
The acquisition of the canning business of Premier Foods by Princes will not be referred to the UK Competition Commision after the company addressed concerns by selling its Fray Bentos brand.The UK Office of Fair Trading (OFT) accepted undertakings offered by Princes Limited to address competition concerns arising from its acquisition of Premier’s canning business. Under the terms of the undertakings, the Fray Bentos brand and its manufacturing assets will be sold to Baxters Food Group Limited.“This merger would have led to a near monopoly in the provision of canned pies in the UK. However, the sale of the Fray Bentos brand to Baxters will restore pre-merger levels of competition for the benefit of consumers,” said Amelia Fletcher, chief economist at the OFT, and decision maker in the case.“The OFT believes that Baxters, with its extensive experience in the sector, is a suitable purchaser for the business,” she added.As a result of the sale, the merger will not be referred to the Competition Commission. 
The outlook for the European meat manufacturers and processors will be positive for most players in 2012, although significant differences exist between sectors, says Rabobank.A recent industry note published by financial services provider Rabobank warned that the European meat industry “will again experience major challenges in the year ahead”, adding that supply discipline will be a key factor to success. In its note Rabobank said current market conditions are fragile; warning that feed prices, the economy, export markets, and exchange rates “could easily shift in 2012”, posing considerable risk to industry margins at both primary and processing levels.It reported that generally the industry should expect to benefit from slightly improved market conditions for both poultry and pork in 2012, with an ongoing favorable market situation for the beef sector. “Although differences exist between the sectors and between the players positions in the value chain, a stable to slightly declining trend in global grain and oilseed prices compared to Q3 2011 levels will be positive for all sectors,” said Rabobank.Mixed outlookThe forecast suggested that at the primary level, an improved position will reduce some cost-price pressure – though it warned that average prices need to remain high to cover feed costs, which are historically high. Whether or not the industry has enough discipline to keep supply in balance will be key, according to Rabobank.  The analysts note said that good discipline “would better prepare the industry to deal with unexpected market developments, such as cost-price increases or market changes caused the by economic situation, which could easily occur in the current fragile market situation.”At the processing level, it suggests that increasing overcapacity in pork and beef “will sharpen the fight for raw materials.” Market position, sufficient sourcing, efficiency and client dependency will be key to success, it said. 
French lawmakers have approved legislation for the proposed tax on sugar sweetened beverages in the country – effective from January 2012. France's top constitutional body, the Constitutional Council, approved the tariff – which works out at about 1 euro cent per container – in efforts to reduce obesity levels in the country and raise funds. The tax will be effective from the first of January 2012.The duty, originally proposed last year , will form part of French austerity measures passed to help battle the debt crisis. The tax is expected to generate around €120 million ($156 million) in revenue for the French government.The legislation is part of a growing trend in Europe to impose so called ‘sin taxes’ on food and drinks associated with poor health and obesity. Last year Hungary introduced a "fat tax" on goods with high fat, sugar and salt content, including soft drinks. Denmark and several other European countries also have soda taxes.However, in its decision approving the legislation French authorities said that while it didn't believe the government was imposing the tax only to promote health and combat obesity, it also didn't see any unfair disadvantages for a specific product group in the legislation.Industry oppositionMany beverage firms oppose the tax, arguing that it is unfair. Earlier this year Coca-Cola Enterprises slammed the tax proposal by suspending plans for a 17million euro investment at a plant in the south of France. The company said pulling out of the investment was "a symbolic protest against a tax that punishes our company and stigmatises our products.""This (investment) has not been cancelled but it must be re-evaluated in the context of uncertainty created by the tax," said Coca-Cola.It has been suggested that most industry members will raise the tax money by increasing price per drink. Coca-Cola recently warned that that any French soda tax could lead to retail price rises of around 10%.Coca-Cola Enterprises’ European president Hubert Patricot said the tax would impact over 90% of the firms portfolio in the country, including sparking carbonated soft drinks, both sugar and diet, juice drinks with added sugar.“We’re not in favour of this kind of discriminatory tax, and we wish they were not there ... As we’ve already said, we expect that volumes in France would be impacted, but…we believe our French business can still grow modestly,” he explained. 
Supplementing cookies with a mixture of the ethnologic extracts of medicinal herbs can raise antioxidant activity in cookies and reduce chemical spoilage, according to a study from Serbian researchers.The study ‘Antioxidant Activity of Medicinal Plant Extracts in Cookies’ published in the Journal of Food Science said that formulating cookies with Vitalplant, a mixture of the ethanolic extracts of parsley fruit, buckthorn bark, mint leaves and caraway fruit could boost antioxidant activity in cookies between 2-6% and retard the process of lipid oxidation, a major cause of chemical spoilage of foods.The research was led by Aleksandra Mišan at the Institute of Food Technologists and funded by the Serbian government.“Vitalplant has a potential as an ingredient for functional food formulations,” said the study.“Supplementation of cookies with medicinal plant extracts could have a positive effect on the oxidative stability of the cookies,” it said.MethodologyAntioxidant activity was measured by two direct erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) tests and four indirect spectrophotometric tests, results of which were correlated with total phenolic and flavonoid content.The potential to retard the process of lipid oxidation was gauged by thiobarbituric acid (TBA) minus reactive substance assay (TBARS) and a DPPH test.In all but one tests, mint extract showed the highest antioxidant capacity while the mixture Vitalplant exhibited improved oxidative stability and high antioxidant activity in most tests, which the researchers said was due to synergistic effects of its components.The study said that further research was needed to confirm the functionality of Vitalplant formulated cookies and consumer studies may be required to judge the taste of these products.Antioxidant formulationThe researchers said there had been increasing interest from the industry into the functional benefits of spices and aromatic herbs in food formulation because of their strong antioxidants.They pointed to a study  conducted in 2000 by Finkel and Holbrook that found foods rich in antioxidants help to prevent cardiovascular diseases, neurodegenerative diseases and cancers.Some of the researchers in recent study flagged up the antioxidant benefits and shelf life extension properties of a sugar beet fibre derived ingredient, Fibrex, when added to cookies in research  published early last year.Source: Mišan, A., Mimica-Dukić, N., Sakač, M., Mandić, A., Sedej, I., Šimurina, O. and Tumbas, V. (2011), Antioxidant Activity of Medicinal Plant Extracts in Cookies. Journal of Food Science, 76: C1239–C1244. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3841.2011.02400.x 
A European Commission regulation requiring products labelled ‘gluten-free’ to contain below a maximum gluten content level came into full force yesterday.Commission Regulation (EC) No 41/2009 stipulates that a product may bear the term ‘gluten-free’ if the gluten content does not exceed 20 mg/kg in the food as sold to the final consumer.Foodstuffs for people intolerant to gluten, containing wheat, rye, barley, oats or their crossbred varieties and especially processed to reduce gluten, must not contain a level of gluten exceeding 100 mg/kg. These must be labelled ‘very low gluten’.Scientific consultancy firm RSSL has developed a quantitative risk assessment toolkit for manufacturers that provides documented evidence in support of labelling statements.Simon Flanagan, food safety consultant at RSSL said: "Many of the procedures applicable to safe handling of allergenic ingredients are equally applicable to handling of ingredients containing gluten.” “Since risk assessment forms the basis of the most practical and useful approach to allergen management, the same applies to gluten management," he said.RSSL stressed that processing could affect how easy it can be to extract and detect gluten in finished products meaning laboratory results need careful interpretation."It is absolutely essential that any laboratory validate its methods for testing for gluten to avoid the risk of false positive or false negative results," said Flanagan.RSSL said that even the recommended method of analysis approved by the Codex Committee on Methodology, Sampling and Analysis (CCMAS), the R5-sandwich ELISA (Mendez method), was not fool proof.“Occasional analytical problems arise from heated or hydrolysed products,” it said. Flanagan said that complying with the new regulation would be “fairly easy for most food manufacturers and suppliers of non-pre-packed foods provided they observe the basic, best-practice principles in ingredient handling and laboratory analysis”.The regulation is directly applicable in all EU member states.In the US, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) plans similar regulations. In 2007, it proposed that only food containing below 20mg per kg (20ppm) of gluten could be labelled as gluten-free.In August last year it opened up its proposal for comment and the legislation has yet to be finalised. 
EC regulations implemented last year that require natural flavouring substances to be identical to something found in nature will greatly impact the industry, according to a report assessing the new regulation.Flavouring Regulation 1334/2008 entered full force in January last year and replaced Flavouring Directive 88/388/EEC. The new regulation, unlike its predecessor is directly applicable, meaning it is not for member states to legislate. Though the regulation has been in place for almost a year, the industry is still getting to grips with the new rules.A study, conducted by Jan Demyttenaere and published in the Flavour and Fragrance Journal , assessed some of the key differences between the new and old regulations. According to Demyttenaere, one of the major changes was a redefinition of what constitutes ‘natural’. Identified in natureDemyttenaere said that one of the most important amendments came in the last line of article 3.2 (c) in the new regulation defining a ‘natural flavouring substance’.It states: “Natural flavouring substances correspond to substances that are naturally present and have been identified in nature.”Demyttenaere said that this meant that is would be no longer sufficient to produce a flavouring in a natural way, now, it must also be identical to something present in nature.He gave the example of a flavouring substances produced by enzymatic or microbial processes from material of vegetable origin, which, while a natural process could not be said to be identified in nature.“This is to avoid that a substance that has never been identified in nature before (and is not naturally occurring), such as ethylvanillin, would be labelled as a ‘natural flavouring substance’, even if today a (new) ‘natural process’ has been discovered for its production that was not described before,” said Demyttenaere.According to EFSA a flavouring is ‘identified in nature’ when “it has been identified in materials of plant, animal, microbiological, or mineral origin, and/or it has been identified in food in the raw state or processed or partly processed for human consumption”.Wider implicationsDemyttenaere said the new regulations would have a major impact on trade and use in commerce of these essential oils and extracts, not only in the European Union (EU) but also internationally.Unlike the EU, in the US, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not specifically addressed the issue of what it means to be natural, leading to a string of lawsuits disputing all-natural claims made on food and drink products.“The labelling issue is especially important because of the impact of consumer’s behaviour in relation to food: consumers prefer natural flavourings above synthetic ones,” said Demyttenaere.“Good and pragmatic definitions in the Flavouring Regulation which have replaced the former Flavouring Directive are essential to ensure that all natural raw materials such as essential oils and extracts can be labelled as natural,” he continued. 
Pectin isolated from sugar beet could boost industry use of natural blue colours by improving the formation and stability of blue hues from anthocyanins, say researchers.The study – published in Food Chemistry – explored the possibilities of using commercial sugar beet pectin (SBP) for the stabilisation of anthocyanin-based blue pigments, by evaluating their potential use in low acid liquids and gelled food models.The research team, led by Dr Dietmar Kammerer of Hohenheim University, Germany, found that SBP and a low molecular pectic polysaccharide fraction (PPF) isolated from sugar beet were suitable hydrocolloids for the stabilisation of anthocyanin- based soluble food colorants.“The promising application of SBP and fractions thereof [PPF] as additives to anthocyanin-based food colorants has been demonstrated for the first time,” said Kammerer and his colleagues.“However, further studies considering alternative anthocyanin sources, optimization of colour retention, interactions with other food ingredients and thermal processing aiming at the improvement of shelf life are still required,” they explained.Natural progressionUntil recently, synthetic colorants were commonly used in the food industry. However, recent studies’ linking certain artificial colours to health problems, coupled with increasing consumer demand for natural ingredients, has led to many manufacturers cutting out synthetic colours.The recent Southampton study reported that consumption of mixtures of additives including sunset yellow (E110), tartrazine (E102), carmoisine (E122), ponceau 4R (E124), allura red (E129) and sodium benzoate led to increased hyperactivity in children.As a consequence, since July 2010, the European Commission Directive 1333/2008 (EC) stipulates labelling of foods containing synthetic colorants with a warning. However, in contrast with reds, yellows, and oranges, only few natural blue colorants are commercially available, say the researchers. “Hence, substitution of synthetic colorants by their natural but less stable counterparts is a major challenge,” they noted, adding that data regarding the formation and stability of anthocyanin-based blue pigments suitable for food application “are scarce.”Study detailsIn the new research, Kammerer and his team investigated the ability of sugar beet isolates to stabilise the colour shift of anthocyanins to a stable blue hue in model foods. The researchers revealed that colour changes resulting from the addition of PPF to anthocyanin containing solutions were much more pronounced than in model solutions based on commercial SBP – noting that this may be due to higher contents of aluminium and iron which help to catalyse and stabilise the colour shift.Systematic evaluations of the food models revealed that the colour shift and stabilisation effects strongly depended on anthocyanin purity and pH conditions. “Highly purified anthocyanin extracts being devoid of colourless polyphenols and citric acid, exhibited strongest … shifts and moderate blue colour stability at pH 5.0 in model solutions containing PPF,” reported Kammerer and his co-workers.They noted that citric acid hindered the formation of intensely blue coloured hues, and non-anthocyanin phenols with vicinal hydroxyl groups reduced the formation and stability of blue colours. Source: Food Chemistry  Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2011.12.034 “Characterization of sugar beet pectin fractions providing enhanced stability of anthocyanin – based natural blue food colorants” Authors: M. Buchweitz, A. Nagel, R. Carle, D.R. Kammerer 
Consumption of ‘junk food diets’ containing high levels of trans fats may lead to brain shrinkage associated with Alzheimer’s, whilst consumption of foods high in vitamins may offer protection, says new research.Published in the journal Neurology , the study found elderly people with diets containing high levels of trans fats are more likely to experience a certain type of brain shrinkage associated with Alzheimer's disease than people who consume less of the artery-damaging fats. The research team, led by Dr Gene Bowman of Oregon Health & Science University, USA, also found that those with high levels of vitamins and omega-3 fatty acids in their blood had better performance on mental alertness tests and showed reduced brain shrinkage.“High trans fat was associated with less favorable cognitive function and less total cerebral brain volume,” explained Bowman and his team.They said the results of their analysis had revealed “distinct nutrient biomarker patterns” that accounts for “a significant degree of variance in both cognitive function and brain volume.”The study is one of the first of its type to specifically measure a wide range of blood nutrient levels, rather than basing findings on less exact data like food intake questionnaires. Bowman added that the positive effects were seen when people had high levels of vitamins B, C, D, E and omega-3 fatty acids.Trans fats Though trace amounts of trans fats are found naturally in dairy and meats, the vast majority are formed during the partial hydrogenation of vegetable oil – that converts the oil into semi-solids for food applications. Trans fats are attractive for the food industry due to their extended shelf life and flavour stability, and have displaced natural solid fats and liquid oils in many areas of food processing.However, scientific reports have suggested trans fatty acids raise levels of (bad) LDL-cholesterol, reduce levels of (good) HDL-cholesterol, and influence other risk factors for cardiovascular diseases (CVD).The links to adverse health, particularly coronary heat disease, has led to a well-publicised bans in Switzerland, and certain US cities such as New York. This has been mirrored with increased pressure on food manufacturers to reformulate products with reduced or removed trans fats.Research detailsThe new study assessed the blood plasma nutrient levels of 104 healthy participants, with an average age of 87, who had few known risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease.It was found that those with high levels of trans fats in their blood performed poorly in memory and thinking tests, whilst people with higher levels of vitamin B, C, D and E, and those with high levels of omega-3 fatty acids, performed well in the tests.The researchers then scanned the brains of 42 participants, finding those with high vitamin levels had larger brains, and those with high trans fats were prone to shrinkage associated with Alzheimer’s.“It's clear that trans fats are bad - both for your heart and now, we see, for your brain,” said Bowman, who added that although the results need to be confirmed in larger populations, he believes the findings are important.“Obviously it is very exciting to think that people could potentially stop their brains from shrinking and keep them sharp by adjusting their diet," he said. Source: Neurology  Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182436598 “Nutrient biomarker patterns, cognitive function, and MRI measures of brain aging” Authors: G.L. Bowman, L.C. Silbert, D. Howieson, H.H. Dodge, M.G. Traber, B. Frei, et al    
Greater safeguards on storage and processing of insects are needed before they can fulfil their potential as an alternative protein source, according to new researcher.The study – published inFood Control– evaluated the potential of edible insects as alternative protein source, examining the microbiological composition of fresh, processed and stored insects.The researchers, from Wageningen University in The Netherlands and the Food and Agriculture Organization of United Nations (FAO), revealed that spore forming bacteria are a potential spoilage and safety risk for insect protein – even in cooked insects. However the team, led by Harmke Klunder of Wageningen, found that simple preservation methods – such as the use of lactic fermented cereals – are promising for protection against spoilage and the extension of shelf-life.“Similar to other animal derived products, insects are rich in nutrients, moisture and contain their gut microflora providing a medium for growth of unwanted micro-organisms in certain conditions,”noted Klunder and her team.“This makes insects susceptible for microbiological hazards if proper heat treatment or storage conditions are not applied,”they warned.“Edible insects need to be processed and stored with care.”Protein potentialKlunder and her colleagues noted that growing pressure on the worlds’ livestock production sector in combination with continued undernourishment for many people in the world, have persuaded many to search for alternative protein sources.One such solution would be to tap in to the ever growing market for insects, which are comparable to conventional livestock meat in terms of nutritional content.“Edible insects are a well-appreciated food consumed in various regions in Asia, Africa and America,”they noted, adding that it has been estimated that nearly 1800 insect species are used for human consumption globally.Indeed, last year were reported  that a paper published by the UK Food Standards Agency found the use of purified or partially purified insect protein in processed foods could become a commercially viable possibility if a reliable source could be identified.Sustainable nutrition?While insects have not traditionally been used for food in the European Union, it is estimated by the FAO that around 2.5 billion people across the world have diets that routinely include insects. And the FAO is interested in promoting edible insects as a highly sustainable source of nutrition.Despite the relatively widespread consumption of insects as food, information concerning their cross-border trade, economic importance, or food safety aspects of their processed products remains limited, said the researchers.“In principle there are three ways insects could be consumed. First as whole insects, recognizable as such; second, whole insects processed in some powder or paste; third, as an extract such as a protein isolate,”explained the researchers.“Due to increasing commercialization of insect farming and trade ... an exploratory evaluation of microbial content of fresh, processed and stored insects seemed timely,”they added.Insect proteinIn the new research, Klunder and her team analysed the use of insects for protein enrichment of food products and the microbiological content of whole edible insects as fresh, processed and stored insects.The team found that a heating step is sufficient for inactivation ofEnterobacteriaceae,“however a remaining potential risk with edible insects is the presence of spore-forming bacteria.”“Alternative preservation techniques without the use of a refrigerator were explored of which drying and acidifying seemed practical and promising,”said Klunder and her co-workers.They added that the use of insect protein for the enrichment of fermented food products is possible, and provides mutual benefits –“as the decreased pH in lactic acid fermented products prevents the growth of potentially harmful microorganisms.” Source: Food Control Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1016/j.foodcont.2012.02.013 “Microbiological aspects of processing and storage of edible insects”Authors: H.C. Klunder, J. Wolkers-Rooijackers, J.M. Korpela, M.J.R. Nout 
Nutrition and polymers were the stand-out divisions for Royal DSM in 2011, a year that saw operating profits rise 15% from €752m to €866m, as the newly life science-oriented ingredients giant singled out Martek buy-out success and committed to ongoing pursuit of an aggressive growth strategy.Martek contributed €284m to 2011 sales and €88m to EBITDA to the nutrition cluster that generated €3.4bn for the year including animal nutrition and personal care. Board member Stephan Tanda said the company’s long history of working together had smoothed the acquisition waters and boosted integration efficiency as well as the Maryland company's algal omega-3 ingredients being a "perfect fit"with its own.€2bn kittyTanda said €2bn in cash lies ready to build on the carotenoid supplier acquisitions of 2011 – Microbia in the US and Vitatene in Spain.“We have €2bn cash on the balance sheet which can be leveraged up so we are looking across our portfolio and acquisitions will continue in 2012,” Tanda told NutraIngredients, with innovative nutritional ingredients and customer-facing, emerging market, premix facilities prioritised.“We are looking at a range of targets but as tends to be the way you have ten in mind and then one happens, but we have a good track record and do not want to overpay and disrespect our shareholders.”In celebrating 11% revenue growth in 2011 on 2010 from €8.176bn to €9.048bn, Tanda said the Dutch multinational was cautious about some markets like the economically challenged Eurozone, but bullish about prospects in emerging markets like Brazil and China which now account for 39% of across-the-board sales.The company expects this emerging market revenue share to be worth 50% by 2015.It noted demand growth for a wide variety of bio-ingredients including yeast extracts, cultures and enzymes, “continues in the BRIC countries as well as in more traditional markets such as Europe and North America.” Tanda worried for the state of European economies but noted, “the innovative part of the nutrition sector is growing more rapidly than generic areas”, something that would buffer slowdowns.The company emphasised the importance of research in its success saying, “nutritional science supported by clinical studies aimed at improved micronutrient supply, based around the well-known vitamins, nutritional lipids and carotenoids as well as an array of new nutritional ingredients.” Fourth quarter company-wide EBITDA of €293m was 6% above Q4 2010, causing DSM to reflect, “The main contributor was Nutrition, which, even excluding Martek, delivered a higher result, despite the effect of the strong Swiss franc on its cost base.”Across the board, DSM has frecast 5-7% organic growth until 2015.Feike Sijbesma, CEO/chairman of the DSM managing board said: "We are conscious that risks to the macro-economic global outlook remain, and that weakness in Europe and some of our end markets, especially building and construction, persists. However, we believe that our balanced, relatively resilient portfolio in health, nutrition and materials, our broad geographic spread with a significant presence in high growth economies, together with our strong balance sheet, leave us well placed to achieve our ambitious 2013 targets." 
Researchers in Brazil have found high levels of the potentially lethal contaminant aflatoxin in chocolate and say constant monitoring is required.The study ‘Co-occurrence of ochratoxin a and aflatoxins in chocolate marketed in Brazil’ published in the Food Control journal evaluated mycotoxins (ochratoxin A and aflatoxins) in 125 samples of powdered, bitter, milk and white chocolate from supermarkets in Brazil.Mycotoxins are secondary metabolites formed by fungi that have been linked to immune suppression and disease.Chocolate high in mycotoxinsAccording to the authors Marina Copettiet al., the presence of aflatoxins in chocolate has rarely been reported. However, they found aflatoxins in 80% of all chocolate examined. Ochratoxin A was also found in 98% of the sample.They were keen to emphasise the joint occurrence of ochratoxin A and aflatoxin as past research was focussed only on ochratoxin A.“The consumption of chocolate with high levels of cocoa in the formulation has been stimulated due to health benefits attributed to some cocoa components but on the other hand, these high cocoa content products tend to have the highest amount of aflatoxins and ochratoxin A,” said the study.“To guarantee a safe consumption of chocolate, there should be a continuous monitoring of both ochratoxin and aflatoxin,” it continued.Aflatoxin B is classified by the International Agency of Research of Cancer as a Group One carcinogen with mutagenic and teratogenic properties. Its presence in food should therefore be as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA), with no tolerable daily intake (TDI), said the authors.Dark chocolate suspectHigher levels of mycotoxins were found in samples of dark chocolate, the form increasingly linked to health benefits.Bitter dark and powdered chocolate had the highest levels of both ochratoxin A and aflatoxins.The authors suspected mycotoxin contamination was increased when more fat-free cocoa solids were present. White chocolate, for example, does not have fat-free cocoa solids and fewer mycotoxins were found during the research.The study added that mycotoxins could be higher in Brazilian chocolate than in cocoa products from other areas, as manufacturers tended to use higher levels of cocoa.Sun dryingThe report said that the sun drying stage was critical to the formation of mycotoxins in cocoa because there is still enough water to sustain fungal growth, which leads to mycotoxin production.The researchers concluded that further studies were needed to understand how mycotoxins were formed in cocoa to limit their presence in chocolate products. 
A consumer group alleges Strauss' Cow Chocolate is more expensive than leading brands in other countriesIsrael’s antitrust authority has received a complaint alleging that the country’s number two food manufacturer The Strauss Group is exploiting its monopoly on the domestic chocolate market by overcharging consumers.The allegations were raised by consumer group Emun Hazibur (Public Trust), which claims Strauss’ prices are an unfair reflection of chocolate prices worldwide.Strauss commands a 60% share of the Israeli chocolate market, according to Leatherhead Food Research.Allegations of ‘overcharging’Emun conducted a study where it compared prices for Strauss’ chocolate in Israel to leading brands , such as Hershey, Cadbury and Milka, in other markets.It claimed that Strauss’ Cow Chocolate (Shokolad Para) was around a third more expensive than other brands in developed countries such as Britain, Germany and the US.Emun has issued a letter of complaint to the company and to the Israel Antitrust Authority.The Antitrust Authority toldConfectioneryNews.comthat it had received the complaint yesterday and would examine it.“The antitrust authority is investing a lot of efforts and resources regarding competition in the food industry,” added Noa Zvi, senior assistant to the director general at the Authority.Strauss reactsMirit Cohen, director of external communications at Strauss told this site: “A preliminary review indicates many inaccuracies, and its findings seem to be based on incomplete data.”The company added in a statement: “As for product prices abroad, it should be noted that the final consumer price is set solely by the retailers, and is not under our control.”Asked if the company would be changing its prices, Strauss said it had made price cuts averaging 10% on 50 of its core products over the past few months.“These are permanent cuts, not a marketing gimmick, one-time discount, or ‘sale’, but regular discount list prices,”it said.Consumer group Emun was contacted for its reaction, but a response was not forthcoming before publication.ImplicationsLeatherhead Food Research market analyst Jonathan Thomas said: “The fact that the market leader has been accused of overcharging may lead more people to seek out slightly cheaper products in response.”A Facebook boycott of Strauss products has already begun, but the company suggested it has not impacted sales.Thomas added that major players such as Kraft and Mars may soon look to up their stakes in Israel after recently investing in nearby markets.Previous investigationIn 2007, Israel’s antitrust authority found that Strauss-Elite used illegal practices to hinder the market penetration of British imported chocolate brand Cadbury by withdrawing discounts from wholesalers that distributed Cadbury products.Strauss was forced to pay around €947,000 (ILS 5m) to the state treasury. 
Irish dairy firm Glanbia says that booming US cheddar export sales fed into a strong 2012, but warned that the key risk to the global dairy market in 2012 centred on “significant concerns” regarding the global economic downturn and its effect on consumers.Announcing its full-year results today, Glanbia said a strong 2011 marked by growing demand from developing economies was likely to prevail in 2012, with strong current growth in global milk production.The multinational nutritional and cheese company reported a 2011 turnover of €2.734bn (€2.166bn: 2010) for the year ending December 31, while operating profits rose from €136.5m to €166.8m year-on-year.Commenting on the current state of the market, Glanbia said: “The current view on global dairy market performance is that prices will soften further in the first half of 2012, relative to H2 of 2011, with increased milk and dairy product availability. H2 of 2012 is forecast to be moderately weak again.“Overall, critical markets such as China, Russia and Southeast Asia are expected to remain solid throughout 2012, limiting market volatility," the firm added.Discussing its results generally, Glanbia noted strong growth in key nutritional markets that benefited its Global Nutritionals business, and led to unprecedented high whey prices, and the firm estimated 15% growth in nutritional bars, 7% in sports nutrition and 18% in nutritional beverages in 2011.Within its US Cheese and Global Nutritionals business (€1.38bn: 2011) the firm said that US cheese prices were strong but volatile, since despite US milk production up 1.8% in 2011, higher prices for competing dairy products led to reduced milk volumes processed into cheese, pushing up prices.But although retail sales of cheese were down overall, this was more than offset by foodservice demand and export sales of American-style cheddar cheese, which were “very strong”, according to Glanbia, up 30% in 2011 after a 60% increase in 2010.Group managing director, John Moloney (pictured) said: "We expect the operating environment in 2012 to be more challenging than in recent years. Current global economic uncertainty has the potential to impact global dairy markets and fragile consumer confidence.The group's focus on driving growth in nutritionals, combined with deep dairy market expertise and strong execution capability, position us well for the future. Our guidance for 2012 is for 5-7% growth in adjusted earnings per share, on a constant currency basis." 
An exentsion of its taste and texture boosting culture portfolio is set to dramatically change the low-fat yoghurt landscape, claims Danish ingredients house Chr. Hansen.The bioscience firm said it has expanded its YoFlex and nu-trish yoghurt cultures line by seven new cultures - three of which have probiotic strains - to improve the taste and mouthfeel of reduced fat versions while also meeting the demand for clean label, healthy and indulgent products.Chr. Hansen said sensory panel testing indicates its latest cultures improve consumer fat perception in low and in medium fat products.And by making cultures that ‟do all the tricks” from flavour to tast and to textures, yoghurt makers can now cut down on the use of additional ingredients and stick to milk, cultures and fruit, thus adhering to clean label demands, claims the Danish firm.Novel flavour notes As well as the cultures with the BB-12 probitotic strain, the ingredients producer said it has developed creamy and premium strains that deliver on the taste, texture and creaminess normally provided by fat and additives.‟The premium cultures are based on traditional yoghurt flavours, while the creamy ones have a novel flavour dimension - fat associated flavour notes derived from lactic acid bacteria that were generated through extensive work with sensory panel testers,” said Ditte Marie Folkenberg, senior manager, fermented milk & probiotics at the group.‟The development work was based around 0.1% fat based yoghurts but we played around a lot with the cultures so that they are equally applicable in higher fat yoghurt categories - 2 to 3% - such as in the dessert segment,” she added when speaking to FoodNavigator.com.Folkenberg said the cultures can also be used in the Greek yoghurt category - a rapidly expanding segment.‟The effect of the cultures is more pronounced in Greek yoghurt containing 1 to 2% fat but they can be used in the ’no fat to 10% fat’ range in this category,” she added.Texture building blocksDevelopment work on the cultures, added the product manager, involved the screening of thousands of strains for texture building blocks and flavour compounds.Chr. Hansen estimates that only 20% of the global yoghurt market is made up of the low-fat category and it reckons that the segment has not grown as significantly as it could do so - given the demand for healthier dairy products.It puts this down to the low quality of existing offerings in terms of taste and texture, and Folkenberg said the new cultures had been designed to counter this.“Using exopolysaccharides (EPS), we chose strains that would boost the viscosity and gel firmness of low-to-medium fat yoghurts to counter the thin, watery mouthfeel consumers associate with standard reduced fat versions.We identified the most promising candidates and then mixed them in different combinations using robot-based handling of mini-scale yoghurts, which enabled a fast evaluation of a very large number of products,” continued the product manager, who added that field trials with lead customers also produced very positive results. 
In a bid to capitalise on growing industry demand for mineral fortifiers, Brussels-based Galactic is doubling its production capacity of lactate esters and calcium lactate.A spokesperson for the supplier told this publication that a multi-million euro backed expansion of the Escanaffles facility in Belgium will allow it to hit 10,000 tonnage output for the lactates. “The additional output is already partially realized and will be fully available by the end of the year,” he added.The calcium lactate is provided in powder and pearl formats, while its lactate esters, used in flavouring applications, are in liquid format, said the company, which is part of the Finasucre Group.The Galactic spokesperson claims that calcium lactate, which has to be labelled with an E-number, offers “superior bio-availability” compared to other calcium sources.Managing director of the company, Frédéric van Gansberghe, also flagged up plans to increase output throughout the suppliers’ portfolio range, adding that the company “may announce further expansion plans in the next few months, especially where specialties are concerned.”But the representative would not be drawn on what other lactates and derivatives are in development at Galactic.January saw the lactic acid supplier announce its intention to invest in an innovation centre for food and non-food applications in Escanaffles, with the company saying that the 2000 m² building will house several laboratories and pilot facilities dedicated to the development of new applications for lactic acid and lactates in meat, bakery and dairy.As part of the initiative, Galactic said it is also looking to develop fermentation halls and chemical reactors for research on new molecules.“Such a concentration of activities will increase information sharing, reduce time-to-market and speed up R&D and patent application,” flagged up the Belgian producer at the time of the announcement.When asked today when the site will be on-stream, the spokesperson said: “Depending on the building permits, it should be completed in the next 12 months.”  
A newly opened culinary centre, targeting Belgian and Dutch processors of meat, poultry, fish, snack and vegetables, is aimed at accelerating speed to market of new products, claims coating systems, seasoning and sauce supplier Griffith Laboratories.The site in Herentals, near Antwerp in Belgium, which involved “a significant investment” on behalf of Griffith Laboratories includes, among other facilities, a domestic style kitchen to simulate home cooking of ready-to-cook meals and also a snacks and nuts development laboratory.Commenting on the reason for establishing such a facility there, Phil Stroud, vice president of marketing and R&D Europe for the savoury ingredients producer, said the intention is to develop products with processors in those countries that appeal to local tastes, and meet the challenges around seasonality as well as retailer demands on summer and winter product portfolios.He told FoodNavigator.com that it is imperative to have local facilities. “Our business model is based on tailored NPD - we want to share insights with local manufacturers and incorporate their knowledge of a specific market’s trends in the development of innovative sauces or coatings for both own-label and private label brands."He stressed that the facility is very much about a “sleeves rolled up and down to work” approach and will provide one day workshops focused around a food manufacturer’s specific project objective.“These sessions will not be seminar driven but instead will be about delivering a hands-on collaborative process involving our in-house chefs and R&D experts, along with a food company’s development technologists and perhaps its marketing and sales executives to ensure category differentiation and that ever tighter supply deadlines can be met.“Dutch and Belgian food producers, like others throughout Europe, continue to seek greater market share through product innovation along health, convenience, indulgence, flavour, taste and texture lines, said Kristel Moens, marketing manager, Europe, at Griffith Laboratories.“Ongoing clean label demands and the need to develop products for the expanding premium end of the market still underpin a lot of the work around NPD,” she added.And she believes that authentic culinary notes and origin of ingredients will continue to play a key role in categories such as sauces. She also flagged up some niche trends for 2012 including seaweed-based coating systems.Griffith Laboratories said the Herentals site adds to its network of culinary centres in Europe, with its other facilities in the UK, Germany, France, Spain and Italy also supporting its growth strategy focused on local market understanding and expertise.The UK site includes sensory testing but, added Stroud, as of now there are no plans to include such a service within the Belgian facility. 
Higher cocoa percentages and single origin cocoa claims on dark chocolate labels fail to improve consumer expectations, according to a study.The report ‘Influence of label information on dark chocolate acceptability’ published in the journal Appetite, found that consumers favoured premium brands for dark chocolate and were not influenced by high cocoa content and single origin claims.Single origin shunThe research by Miriam Torres et al. said: “Claims about a high percentage of cocoa and single origin did not create higher expectations in these consumers compared to regular dark chocolates.“Consumers did not like the sensory characteristics of chocolates with such a high percentage of cocoa (85%), and Ecuadorian origin was not appreciated by consumers as a feature that improves the sensory quality of dark chocolates.”Single origin chocolate is chocolate made from cocoa beans from just one country.BrandingThe authors said sensory characteristics of the chocolate was the most important factors and they emphasised the influence of branding.“Brand was an important factor in the consumer response to a chocolate product. For the premium brand dark chocolates, expectations were high and fulfilled by sensory characteristics of the products,” said the study.MethodThe researchers asked 109 regular dark chocolate consumers to give their thoughts on six different dark chocolate products, varying in brand (premium and store) and cocoa-content.Participants were evaluated under three conditions. Firstly, a “blind test” where they only tasted the chocolate, secondly an “expected test”, where they observed only label information and finally an “observed test” combing tasting and label observation.FindingsUnder the expected condition, participants said they were not influenced by one product claiming to have 85% cocoa and having an Ecuadorian cocoa origin.Instead, participants tended to prefer premium private label products.They were also not enthused by store brand, however, in the blind test these products were deemed to taste as good as private label products.The authors said the study would help to understand consumer responses to new products. 
Ingredients manufacturer Rousselot has announced a price increase on its gelatine portfolio to balance out spiralling raw material costs.The mandatory price increase, effective April 1st 2012, is will compensate for an ongoing upward trend in raw material costs, which the company said previous productivity programs and price adjustments have not been able to offset.The main products involved are Rousselot pig and bovine gelatine, in addition to collagen peptides.The company, who supply collagen and gelatine to the food and pharmaceutical industries, said the increase will vary across grades, product lines and across regions, with the exact level of increase communicated by local sales representatives. 
When it comes to bakery products, industry need not compromise on health and taste, say researchers who reveal that the use of flax could create ‘healthy, tasty, and convenient’ products.Their study – published in theJournal of Food Science–reveals that the taste and texture of cinnamon raisin bagels is not as affected by the addition of flaxseed compared to other types of bagels.The research team, led by Michel Aliani from the University of Manitoba,USA, explained that the addition of flax had no effect on the appearance, colour, and texture acceptability of the tested bagel. The authors noted that cinnamon raisin bagel“had significantly higher flavour acceptance compared to sunflower sesame and plain bagels.”“This study showed that flaxseed aroma and flavour were detected in fortified compared to non-fortified bagels but bagels with this high flaxseed amount were still acceptable with the addition of cinnamon raisin flavouring,”said the researchers, who noted that many consumers now seek“functional foods that contain omega-3 fatty acids.”“Commercial bakeries can use these results to formulate healthy, tasty, and convenient products,”said Aliani and his colleagues.Fashion for flax?Aliani and his team added that bakery products containing flaxseed – which is a rich source of the omega-3 fatty acid alpha linolenic acid (ALA) – may provide health benefits for consumers.“However, the effect of adding flaxseed, especially in the high amounts required for use as the food supplement in clinical trials (23% by weight of the raw ingredients), may affect the flavour characteristics and consumer acceptability,”they noted.Study detailsThe researchers tested the sensory attributes of bagels containing 30 grams of milled flaxseed using nine members of a trained tasting panel, and by 89 participants using a consumer test.They found that grain/flax aroma and flavour were significantly higher for the flax bagels compared to the non-flax bagels. However, they noted that cinnamon raisin bagel had significantly lower grain/flax aroma and flavour – and significantly higher sweet aroma and taste compared to the plain and sunflower sesame types.“Bagels with flax showed a significantly lower mean value for flavour acceptability, overall acceptability, and frequency of eating compared to bagels without flax,”revealed Aliani and his colleagues.“Although the presence of flax significantly lowered the flavour acceptability, cinnamon raisin bagels were rated higher in flavour acceptability compared to the other two samples perhaps due to a higher perceived sweetness in addition to the cinnamon and raisin flavouring,”they explained.As a result, the team concluded that cinnamon raisin appears to be a promising flavouring solution for bagels containing ALA in the form of milled flaxseed.“Bagels made with 23% milled flaxseed (approximately 2 times the amount in regular flax baked products) provided 6 g ALA, an amount high enough to test the efficacy of ALA in human subjects without causing gastrointestinal distress,”added Aliani. Source: Journal of Food Science Volume 77, Issue 1,  pages S62–S70, doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3841.2011.02509.x “Effect of Flax Addition on the Flavor Profile and Acceptability of Bagels”Authors: M. Aliani, D. Ryland, G.N. Pierce 
The Irish Agriculture and Food Development Authority, Teagasc, have applied to field test genetically modified, blight resistant, potatoes as part of a new EU research project.The Irish authority will apply for a licence to undertake a series of field studies using GM potatoes resistant to potato late blight disease – to determine the potential impact the technology could have on biodiversity and soil ecosystems.Dr Ewen Mullins, of Teagasc, told FoodNavigator that the trials would form part of a wider EU project called ‘AMIGA’.He explained the initiative would investigate many aspects of GM monitoring and evaluation, including improving knowledge on the long term impacts of specific GM crops, and identifying bio-indicators that would allow for better integration of GM research.“Our part is just one area, and that is to look at GM potatoes modified for blight resistance,”he explained.Mullins added that one of the main things to understand about the project was that it was part of a wider framework.“The issues we are dealing with are not Irish specific, but apply across the whole of Europe.”He said that the wider EU project would look at both insect resistant maize and blight resistant potatoes, because they are the two crops authorised for use in Europe currently.“From an Irish point of view, the AMIGA project works well with our goals because we have a potato sector that is solely reliant on the use of fungicides, and we have EU legislation that is restricting the use of fungicides and eliminating certain chemicals … So the use of fungicides is not sustainable into the future,”Mullins explained.“We have to look for alternatives.”GM research“We need to quantify the long term impact of growing GM blight resistant potatoes,” said Mullins, who noted that currently ‘conventional potatoes’ in Ireland receive“at a minimum about 13 and possibly up to 17 sprays of fungicide per growing season.”“That’s a phenomenal fungicide load,”said Mullins.“The GM lines that we will be using have been modified with a single wild potato gene, and that confers very strong resistance to blight disease, which means the line shouldn’t require and fungicide at all.”“That’s what we suspect, but we need to test that, and look at the impact of that line on soil biodiversity,”he explained.Mullins said that the new trials will gauge if, when, and how the bacteria that cause blight disease (Phytophthora infestans) evolve, as this has knock-on effects on plant and animal biodiversity.“The GM study is about gauging the environmental impact of growing GM potatoes in Ireland and monitoring how the pathogen, which causes blight, and the ecosystem reacts to GM varieties in the field over several seasons,”explained 
New Zealand dairy co-operative Fonterra has presented what it claims is significant research showing that its proprietary probiotic strains reduce childhood disease and childhood allergy rates, while the addition of dairy lipids to formula aids infant cognitive development.Speaking at the 16th Congress of Paediatricians in Moscow, Fonterra researcher Dr. James Dekker presented a clinical trial due to be published in the journal Clinical and Experimental Allergy, against the backdrop of increasing incidences of eczema in Europe.The study followed 425 infants until 2 years of age, and indicated that consumption of Fonterra’s trademarked Lactobacillus rhamnosus HN001 (DR20) probiotic strain reduced eczema prevalence by 45% and the severity of symptoms by 41%.At a four-year follow-up, Fonterra said the DR20 group continued to show a reduced prevalence of eczema compared to infants in the placebo group, two years after stopping the supplementation.Gut and immune functionDekker also presented a study involving 312 children aged 1-3 years, which examined the combined effects of Fonterra’s Bifidobacterium animalissubspecies lactis HN019 (DR10) probiotic strain and prebiotic galacto-olichosaccharide (GOS) in regard to gut and immune function benefits.At the two-year follow-up, the group fed milk enriched with DR10 and GOS “demonstrated reduced disease risks across a range of childhood morbidities, including dysentery, pneumonia and severe-acute lower respiratory infections, compared to the control group fed fortified milk,” Fonterra said.One of the company’s researchers in the field of ‘bioactive dairy lipids’, Dr. Paul McJarrow, also presented a recent Indonesian pilot study (currently in press) by Gurnida et al., ‘Association of Complex Lipids Containing Gangliosides with Cognitive Development of Six-Month Old Infants’.Gurnida et al. concluded that adding gangliosides (contained in human breastmilk and linked to infant neurodevelopment) to infant formula – by adding complex dairy lipids – resulted in improved cognitive development scores for participants, compared to infants fed standard formula.Cognitive development scores30 infants were fed standard infant formula from 2-8 weeks until 24 weeks of age (the control group) while 29 received the same formula supplemented with milk lipid to increase ganglioside content to around 11-12μg/ml; a reference group comprised breast-fed infants.Statistically significant results showed that ganglioside supplementation using complex milk lipids significantly increased ganglioside serum levels (against control) and resulted in “significant increases” in hand-eye coordination IQ, performance IQ and General IQ test scores, measured using Griffith instruments.Cognitive development scores and serum ganglioside levels for the treatment group did not differ from the reference or breast milk group.Gurnida et al. said their study was the first using in healthy normal infants who were not able to be breastfed, to investigate the cognitive benefits of increasing ganglioside intake via a complex milk lipid-fortified infant formula.“While it is difficult to attribute the observed cognitive development benefits in the present study to increases in gangliosides alone, the impact of ganglioside supplementation on serum levels supports the hypothesis that the level of ganglioside intake is important,” they wrote.Despite a small number of trial participants, the team said that the pilot study findings were “sufficiently compelling” to warrant further investigation and confirmation through larger studies.McJarrow said that, while fat or lipids constituted around one third of the total solid ingredients of breast milk and infant formula, most commercially available infant formulas did not contain milk fat globule membrane proteins and bioactive dairy lipids at the same level as human milk.Maintaining bioactivityThe principle challenge in incorporating these ingredients into infant formula was maintaining their bioactivity, according to McJarrow; Fonterra said it had developed gentle processing techniques to achieve this result.The firm said its complex dairy lipids provided protection against infections and assisted cognitive development, and McJarrow said: “While there is no question that breast milk is the best form of food for newborns and infants, some mothers are unable to breastfeed for medical or other reasons.“That’s why it’s important they have access to safe and nutritious alternatives offering nutritional benefits as close as possible to those provided by human milk.” McJarrow added that – via two in-vitro studies – Fonterra had confirmed the anti-rotavirus activity (the virus is a common cause of severe diarrhea in infants and young children) of its complex dairy lipids, showing “around a 50% reduction in the number of cells infected with rotavirus”.. 
Associated British Foods (ABF) is on track to deliver strong, full-year growth, however, high raw material costs in a competitive environment has seen the group struggle against stronger, more aggressive players in the ingredients market.ABF today released its business trading update in the wake of interim results set to be announced on April 24 that detailed a weak performance in its ingredients division, contrasted by strong growth in its sugar business.James Targett, senior analyst, equity research at Berenberg Bank, said that ABF has struggled in ingredients, due to the nature of the market housing “more aggressive competitors.”As a result, profitability in ABF’s ingredients division has been weaker, Targett told FoodNavigator.com.Clive Black, head of research and retail analyst at Shore Capital, added, “over the last 18 months, profitability has more or less halved.”“The ingredients business will need self-improvement… It has a lot of work to do, and in a very competitive environment,” Black said.However, he added that within the next three years, “the company will manage to rebound.”Graham Jones, executive director, equity research at Panmure Gordon & Co forecast a full-year earnings before interest, taxes and amortization (EBITA) of £50m (€59m) for the group’s ingredients division, down from £56m last year.ABF’s ingredients division (ABFI) is comprised of several companies operating in the enzyme, emulsifier, yeast and grain-based ingredients sectors.Riding the crest of the sugar waveAmid difficulties in its ingredients business, ABF noted a strong performance in sugar.“The primary drivers for growth in this sector have been EU sugar price and improvement in sugar yields,” Targett said.The growth is “not as a result of specific management decisions or strategies,” he added.Black said, “the performance of the sugar business, is to a considerable degree, reflecting the much higher profit margins in the industry.”With ABF’s strong positioning and efficient operations in the British Isles and Spain, it was able to reap the benefits of favourable market conditions, he added.Jones forecasted full-year EBITA in this division to reach £469m (around €555m) compared to £315m last year.He detailed that within the UK there would be “substantial profits due to a much better crop, the absence of high processing costs, strong factory performances and high prices.”High beet yields in Spain has also positively contributed, he noted.Future focusDespite difficulties in its ingredients division, ABF is “on track to deliver strong, full-year growth”, Jones said.Targett agreed that the group should meet targets but noted that observers, following a very strong Q1, had anticipated stronger annual results.In terms of future growth, “the bulk of future investments will be in the grocery and retail divisions,” he said.Black agreed and said further bolt-on acquisitions in the grocery sector are likely but could also happen in the ingredients division.Targett noted that Asia would “certainly be an avenue for future growth” for the group. 
A combination of increasing demand for low-fat food and the rising popularity of natural emulsifiers will drive growth in the global market for emulsifiers, say industry analysts GIA.The new report – from Global Industry Analysts, Inc (GIA) – predicts increasing demand for emulsifiers in the global market for food, beverage, and personal care, markets’ will see a gradual increase in demand for emulsifier ingredients - with global sales reaching 2.6 million tons by 2017.“This characteristic of making healthier products similar in taste to fat-containing versions of products has enabled emulsifiers in gaining widespread acceptance in the market,”said GIA.However, the report, titled“Emulsifiers: A Global Strategic Business Report”, warned that despite the presence of such strong growth drivers,“a modest growth rate is predicted for the market over the analysis period,”adding that a likely slow-down in volume sales of all food products on account of the recession will balance out much of the market growth.“Although economies worldwide are gradually recovering, the protracted impact of the downturn continues to pose challenges for several end-use industries, leading to the resultant decline or static demand for most of the emulsifier segments,”said GIA.Innovative marketThe report calculates an increase in the popularity of niche and premium positioned foods, such as fortified breads and confectionery – which themselves will create the need for specialty emulsifiers.“The change in consumer demand patterns forced suppliers to develop emulsifiers that not only act as fat replacement products but also provide the same texture, flavour, structural and aerating characteristics,”said the GIA report.It notes that although increasing demand for value-added products and consolidation within the food additive industry“is expected to create challenges for the food emulsifier market”, the development of new technologies within the industry“are expected to boost market growth in coming years.”Emulsifier growthFood manufacturers are increasingly focusing on development of novel ingredients that are capable of reducing fat content and providing healthier food options without affecting taste or flavour. With this in mind, GIA said if believes that the use of emulsions and emulsifiers to stabilise or maintain the sensory characteristics of foods – texture, flavour, and taste – will grow in the next five years.The report predicts that Europe and the USA, as already strong players in the global emulsifier market, will capture the majority of the new growth. However, it adds that Asia-Pacific is forecast to record the fastest annual growth rates (of around 9%) through 2017. 
The German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR) has called for a reduction in the salt content in processed foods - as action against the risk of hypertension.The new call for industry to reduce levels of salt in foods comes on the back of a recent assessment that found the majority of the German population consume too much salt.In a statement, the BfR said that high salt consumption can drive up blood pressure and supports the development of cardiovascular diseases.“In many people, reducing salt intake can lower blood pressure,”it said.“However, what is important is not so much how often we use the salt shaker, but rather the consumption of bread, dairy products (e.g. cheese), meat products and sausages,”warned the agency – who are responsible for preparing expert opinions on food safety for the German Government.The institute said that against the background that almost half of German adults (44% of women and 51% of men) have elevated blood pressure,“the BfR recommends that the salt content in processed foods be reduced.”German actionAccording to the joint assessment of the BfR, the Max Rubner Institute (MRI) and the Robert Koch Institute (RKI), the majority of the German population consume too much salt:“Especially young men, children and adolescents consume too much salt,”said the BfR.The group said that since there is a connection between such high salt intake and hypertension, it is recommended to reduce salt intake in the population.“However, a diet low in salt is not easy to implement, because almost all processed foods contain salt,”said the BfR statement.“A recommendation to consumers to eat less processed foods is hardly realisable, since they constitute an inherent part of the diet in Germany … For this reason, the BfR recommends that the salt content in processed foods is reduced.”Salt reductionSodium is a vital nutrient and is necessary for the body to function. However the average daily salt consumption in the western world (between 10 and 12 grams) vastly exceeds maximum recommendations from WHO/FAO of 5 grams per day. Such high intakes of dietary sodium have been linked to negative health impacts, including the development of hypertension, cardiovascular disease, certain cancers, and other health problems.  In countries like the UK, Ireland, the USA, and other industrialized countries, over 80% of salt intake comes from processed food – meaning many do not realise they are consuming such high quantities. Because of this, reducing the sodium content in food products has become a major issue for the processed-food sector.Industry action The process of reducing salt levels in foods is an ongoing process within the industry, with many now acknowledging that high sodium levels in some foods is a major issue for the industry.However, the reduction of salt in processed foods is a major challenge because in addition to salts role as a flavour enhancer, the food industry has historically added salt (sodium chloride) to foods to enhance shelf life, modify flavour, enhance functionality, and to control fermentation.Experts in the area have previously noted“aclear need for the food industryto identify technical routes toenable functionality to be modified, flavour to be enhanced, and shelf life to be preserved, whilstreducing the concentration of sodium salts and maintaining theconsumer experience.” 
Manufacturers can seize upon the underdeveloped frozen bakery market in Eastern Europe, according to an analyst at EuromonitorFrozen Bakery retail value (RSP) in Eastern Europe is forecast to rise around 28% by 2016 to €80.2m, according to data from Euromonitor.Rusnė Naujokaitytė, Euromonitor country research manager, told BakeryAndSnacks.com: “Research suggests that it is worth investing in frozen bakery in East Europe, but the companies should first of all analyse different factors.”“Countries economic development is the most important factor for frozen bakery,” she said.Where opportunities lieAccording to Naujokaitytė larger developed countries, such as Poland and Croatia, where consumers are aware of frozen bakery and sales are higher present better prospects.“The most favourable markets to invest for frozen bakery products are: Slovakia, Bulgaria and Romania, Poland and Czech Republic,” she said.In these markets, living standards are higher, retail channels are developed and most females are working and therefore have no time to bake at home, she said.“Although a minus can be that the market is already saturated and can be hard to get through the market leaders,” she added.The market leader in Eastern Europe the Levada Group, followed closely by Bella Bulgaria, according to Euromonitor figures.Naujokaitytė said other perspective markets for frozen bakery are countries with high baked goods consumption, such as Serbia, Macedonia, and Hungary.Markets to avoidHowever, opportunities in some countries, like Belarus, Hungary and Slovenia, may be limited as bread consumption is in decline as new healthier options such as bread substitutes are preferred, she said.“Less developed Eastern European countries with not much developed retailing chains should be avoided because of small spaces and lack of refrigerating equipment,” she added.She gave Russia, Ukraine and Caucasus countries as examples.Evaluate the marketNaujokaitytė said manufactuers should first assess the market to gauge consumer preferences.“It is always good to evaluate consumer habits and not to be launching white bread in traditional dark/black/rye bread countries (e.g. Baltics, Belarus, Russia).”She said that local companies currently dominate the Easter Europe frozen bakery sector.“Among top five biggest frozen bakery companies in East Europe there are no international companies. The only one appearing at rank no 7 is Nowaco International A/S,” she said.According to Naujokaitytė, local companies prosper because they know what type of bakery their consumers like.“Country knowledge is very valuable in such specific sector like bakery, when products vary from country to country,” she said.Who can capitalise?Naujokaitytė said that private label firms were best placed to capitalise as growth is expected for private label products in the region.She added that large multinational manufacturers were always in good position, because they have big marketing budgets.“Multinationals would be strong if they manage to launch the international bread and bakery types which are consumed in most of Europe, such as Italian breads, buns and croissants,” she said.Naujokaitytė also spoke about the growing trend in a video available here. 
UK trade body Dairy UK has called on the nation’s government to do more to communicate the positive health benefits of dairy products, and warns that the current focus on reformulation risks ‘putting many consumers off eating dairy foods’.In its ‘Action for Growth’ document (subtitled ‘A Plan for Partnership Between Government and Industry to Deliver Growth in the UK Dairy Sector’) Dairy UK addresses the issue of nutrition policy alongside other key issues such as R&D, CAP reform, water regulation, exports and origin labeling.But warning that public health messages currently focused on ‘negatives’ that risked tarnishing the image of healthy foods, Dairy UK said that consumers would be better served by information stressing the ‘positives’, to make healthy food choices.Dairy foods such as milk, cheese and yogurt were nutrient rich – with a high amount of vitamins and minerals per calorie, Dairy UK said, and the body argued that the UK government should do more to encourage the consumption of such foods.Rather than simply paying attention to cutting calorie intake, the authorities also needed to promote initiatives aimed at promoting calorie burning through physical activity, the trade body argued.Reformulation focus risks damaging dairyIn addition, a Dairy UK spokesman told DairyReporter.com: “The current focus on reformulation, and in particular, the press associated with it, risks putting many consumers off eating dairy foods. Since consumers do not have a large nutritional knowledge, they risk not being able to replace the nutrients they would miss by reducing the amount of dairy they eat or avoiding it altogether.”But Dairy UK said that signals from policy makers suggested that they would like to see the reformulated product become the standard product and see the standard product disappear. “Having, for example, only low fat options would not be appropriate for some segments of the population, i.e. the very young and in many cases, the elderly, and could impact their long-term nutritional status.”The authorities also needed to ensure that dairy foods were not disadvantaged by prospective nutrient profiles – planned to accompany the EU nutrition and health claims regulation – Dairy UK said.Asked whether Dairy UK was aware of a timetable for possible legislation on nutrient profiles – subject to a scientific opinion from the European Food Safety Authority’s NDA panel in February 2008 – the spokesman said: “It’s been promised for a long time, but we still don’t know when to expect it.”“There is a real risk that certain dairy products could be disadvantaged if the profiles are based on sat fat and salt levels that are too tight. We need to ensure the profiles are appropriate, particularly for UK cheese,” he added.Department of Health responseDairy UK also called for ‘sector pledges’ under the government’s Responsibility Deal, whereby the industry could agree its own pledges with the Department of Health (DOH) and the Secretary of State “without oversight from other groups”.The spokesman said: “What we are looking to develop are dairy specific actions, agreed with the DoH and falling within the newly announced Calorie Reduction Pledge. We want dairy specific actions so that we can establish exactly where the sector is at present and where we can aim to be by specific milestones.”Presented with Dairy UK’s general concerns, a DOH spokeswoman said: “Milk and dairy products are an important source of energy, protein and calcium for growing children and young adults especially in relation to dental and bone health. The Department of Health recognises the role milk and dairy foods have as part of a healthy balanced diet.“Milk and dairy products form part of Government advice on a healthy balanced diet, as depicted in the eatwell plate. This advice is promoted through a range of channels including NHS Choices and Change4Life messaging and websites.”Bad press based on ‘flimsy evidence’Professor Ian Givens, director of Reading University’s Centre for Dairy Research, recently presented a paper at the European Dairy Association’s (EDA’s) policy conference on saturated fats.Explaining a slide he presented there, showing a Daily Mail story from January 2010, where a heart surgeon called for butter to be banned on public health grounds, due to high saturated fatty acid content, Givens told DairyReporter.com: “There has been quite a lot of attention played to milk and dairy products over the last year or two, a lot of which has been based on flimsy evidence, I think.”Asked if he agreed with Dairy UK that dairy deserved stronger support from government, Givens said: “I agree with them, certainly as far as milk is concerned the evidence is now quite strong (although not as strong for cheese and butter) that there are definite benefits in consuming more rather than less. That probably applies right across the age span as well.Givens added: “Here in the UK, for instance, there’s a major issue with teenagers, particularly teenagers, because their calcium intake (through milk) drops from age of 11 to around 18, at the point when they need it most for bone development, etc. The dairy industry could help to deal with this issue, and could do with more support from government.” 
Kraft Foods has apologised to US and Canadian customers after a manufacturing flaw led to Tassimo T Discs spraying consumers with hot liquid and coffee grounds, leading the firm to voluntarily recall around four million discs and almost two million machines.The US Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) reported that, as of February 9, there had been 140 reported incidents of Tassimo brewers spraying consumers, and 37 associated reports of second-degree burns, including one involving a 10 year-old Minnesota girl who was hospitalized after receiving second-degree burns to her face and neck.Second-degree facial burnsFurther consumer complaints related specifically to the plastic T Disc pods used in the Tassimo system, with an additional 21 reports of injury, one affecting a 2 year-old Canadian girl who received second-degree facial burns.A Kraft Foods spokeswoman told BeverageDaily.com: “For both recalls, we’re working in full co-operation with the regulatory authorities. Our consumers’ safety is our highest priority, and we apologise to our consumers who have been affected by these recalls.”On February 9, Kraft issued a voluntary recall of certain code dates of Tassimo Espresso T Discs – Maxwell House, Gevalia and Nabob brands. Health Canada said that around four million packages of the affected espresso discs were produced between last August and February 2012, and sold in retailers in the US and Canada.Massive recallTassimo Single-Cup Brewers (around 835,000 in the US, around 900,000 in Canada) with the Bosch brand name and ‘Tassimo Professional’ brewers were subject to a separate recall; the CPSC said that the flaw potentially affected brewers made between June 2008 and February 2012.“This defect can cause the recalled Espresso T Discs to become clogged and spray hot liquid and coffee grounds onto consumers during or after brewing,” Kraft said.The firm told customers to stop using the plastic discs immediately, and but said it had received separate consumer reports that the T Discs could burst “and spray hot liquid, coffee grounds or tea leaves onto consumers using the Tassimo by Bosch brewer, as well as bystanders, posing a potential burn hazard”.Kraft said it had worked with the machine manufacturer, California-based BSH Appliances, both on the recall, and to develop a replacement T Disc holder.“Consumers can easily remove the existing holder from their Tassimo by Bosch brewer and snap the new one into place. This should take less than a minute,” the spokeswoman said. 
Nestlé plans to build a new Dolce Gusto factory in Germany to capitalise on one of its fastest-growing European businesses, with a growth rate of over 50%, and told BeverageDaily.com it is exploring 'solutions' that will allow UK consumers to recycle pods used by the system.The €220m factory investment is in Schwerin, and Nestlé said that Germany was the largest market for the brand worldwide – will be operational by the end of 2013: it will have 12 production lines and create 450 jobs.But asked by BeverageDaily.com what steps the firm was taking to counter perceptions in some quarters that such systems were wasteful, a Nestlé spokesman revealed that, in the UK market, for instance, while 90% of the firm's packaging was recyclable, Dolce Gusto pods were not.He said: "We are exploring a number of solutions and hope to be able to provide an update on our plans shortly. We are committed to further reducing the environmental impact of the Nescafé Dolce Gusto capsules and the packaging of all our Nescafé Dolce Gusto products, without compromising on safety, quality or enjoyment of our products."As part of our overall sustainability plan, we are looking at how our machines can use energy in a smarter way. Our sustainability focus is to make sure that every new machine achieves a ‘best in class’ energy status," he added.The spokesman said: "For example we have saved 45% of the total energy consumption by introducing our eco-mode 20 function, which allows machines to go into auto-power off after 20 minutes, ensuring that only the energy required is used to make each drink and drastically reducing the power consumption of the machine when not in use."Compelling innovationDiscussing the brand's success last week in light of Nestlé's 2011 results, CEO Paul Bulcke said: "Dolce Gusto has been on the market for five years now. We have it now in 58 markets, and only last year we launched it in 17 markets the world over. The brand is close to becoming a CHF 600m business in only five years. That is what we call a really compelling innovation that is breaking through."During an official ceremony at the Schwerin site, Laurent Freixe, Nestlé’s European Zone Director said that Dolce Gusto was the portioned coffee market leader in 20 countries.He said: “Our establishment of this new factory reflects more than just an important investment to expand our business. It illustrates deep trust in the country where we have had successful operations for over 100 years.“This is one of our biggest investments in Europe and highlights our continuous investment in our capacity for innovation,” he added.Strategic proximity to HamburgSchwerin is only around 100km away from Hamburg – the largest European port for coffee imports – and Nestlé said it would produce around 2bn coffee capsules a year (coffee, Nesquik, Nestea varieties) for export to Germany, Eastern Europe and Scandinavia.The new site will be Nestlé’s third, since the company already possesses sites in Girona, Barcelona and Tutbury in the UK: £110m was invested here last year to triple production from 2013, but the site is currently running at full capacity producing 4m capsules per day.Furthermore, last March Nestlé also announced that it would spend CHH 64m increasing production at Girona, which is Europe's largest Nescafé factory, to 2.5bn capsules per year from 2012.Nescafe Dolce Gusto waslaunched in 2006 in the UK, Germany and Switzerland, and Nestlé aims to achieve CHF 1bn in sales for the brand by 2013.Cost deterring uptake?Last month, UK research firm Mintel said that 18-44 year-olds in the US were more likely than their older companions to cite convenience as a reason for using pod-style machines systems as Dolce Gusto.Senior analyst from Mintel, Garima Goel Lal, said: "This is likely a reflection of the fact that for younger adults, coffee is often seen as an on-the-go beverage that can provide a needed energy boost.”She added: “A key driver of sales growth in the coffee category is innovation. The single-cup segment of the coffee business is driving growth and is likely to continue to contribute to gains for the foreseeable future."And despite perceptions of better value among those buying pod-style coffee - over coffeehouse offerings - Goel Lal said that price was one of the main deterrents to further single-serve uptake for consumers who still bought and brewed freshly ground coffee. 
Nestlé plans to build a new Dolce Gusto factory in Germany to capitalise upon what it describes as one of its fastest growing European businesses, with a growth rate of over 50%.The €220m factory investment is in Schwerin, and Nestlé said that Germany was the largest market for the brand worldwide – will be operational by the end of 2013: it will have 12 production lines and create 450 jobs.Discussing the brand's success last week in light of Nestlé's 2011 results, CEO Paul Bulcke said: "Dolce Gusto has been on the market for five years now. We have it now in 58 markets, and only last year we launched it in 17 markets the world over. The brand is close to becoming a CHF 600m business in only five years. That is what we call a really compelling innovation that is breaking through."During an official ceremony at the Schwerin site, Laurent Freixe, Nestlé’s European Zone Director said that Dolce Gusto was the portioned coffee market leader in 20 countries.He said: “Our establishment of this new factory reflects more than just an important investment to expand our business. It illustrates deep trust in the country where we have had successful operations for over 100 years.”“This is one of our biggest investments in Europe and highlights our continuous investment in our capacity for innovation,” he added.Strategic proximity to HamburgSchwerin is only around 100km away from Hamburg – the largest European port for coffee imports – and Nestlé said it would produce around 2bn coffee capsules a year (coffee, Nesquik, Nestea varieties) for export to Germany, Eastern Europe and Scandinavia.The new site will be Nestlé’s third, since the company already possesses sites in Girona, Barcelona and Tutbury in the UK: £110m was invested here last year to triple production from 2013, but the site is currently running at full capacity producing 4m capsules per day.Furthermore, last March Nestlé also announced that it would spend CHH 64m increasing production at Girona, which is Europe's largest Nescafé factory, to 2.5bn capsules per year from 2012.Nescafe Dolce Gusto waslaunched in 2006 in the UK, Germany and Switzerland, and Nestlé aims to achieve CHF 1bn in sales for the brand by 2013.Cost deterring uptake?Last month, UK research firm Mintel said that 18-44 year-olds in the US were more likely than their older companions to cite convenience as a reason for using pod-style machines systems as Dolce Gusto.Senior analyst from Mintel, Garima Goel Lal, said: "This is likely a reflection of the fact that for younger adults, coffee is often seen as an on-the-go beverage that can provide a needed energy boost.”She added: “A key driver of sales growth in the coffee category is innovation. The single-cup segment of the coffee business is driving growth and is likely to continue to contribute to gains for the foreseeable future."And despite perceptions of better value among those buying pod-style coffee - over coffeehouse offerings - Goel Lal said that price was one of the main deterrents to further single-serve uptake for consumers who still bought and brewed freshly ground coffee. 
IndonesiaWith strong dairy consumption growth and low per capita consumption, Indonesia offers good opportunities for Irish dairy sector, according to Bord Bia, particularly in dairy powders.As the fourth most populous country in the world – with a 245m population – Bord Bia (the Irish Food Board) noted that Indonesia was posting 6% GDP growth per year, with dairy consumption growing strongly, “albeit from a low base”.According to Bord Bia: “Consumption in 2010 was 11kg per capita, and this is the lowest in Asia. Local farmers supply 40% of the total dairy requirement, which means that 60% has to be imported.”“For Irish dairy exporters there are opportunities in this market as [research consultancy] Gira forecasts that the dairy powder market will continue to grow at 6% per annum. Local supply will grow, but not by enough to meet growing local demand,” Bord Bia added.The Irish Food Board said that powdered milk comprised 39% of Indonesian consumption, with sweetened condensed milk at 35% and ready to drink milk accounting for 26%.Indonesia was a major importer of dairy powder, the board said, with total powder imports (whole milk powder, skim milk powder and whey) growing at 10% per annum and totaling 230,000 tonnes.SMP was the largest import sector – used in reconstituted milk for babies and 1-6 year olds, and in supply terms the US had a 31% market share in 2010, followed by the EU at 29%, New Zealand for 25% and Australia at 13%, Bord Bia said. 
Increasing aromas and using oxidised enzymes can help bread manufacturers reduce salt as a Dutch cap on salt content looms, according to ingredients firm Sonneveld.The Dutch government has introduced legislation to enter force on 1 January 2013 that will set the maximum salt content in bread from 1.8% to 1.5%.The legislation applies only to bread-based products, such as loaves, buns and fruit bread and is not applicable to all baked goods.Though similar initiatives are on-going in the UK and Belgium, the cap in the Netherlands will be lowest in Europe.Replacing salt ‘impossible’Netherlands-based ingredients firm Sonneveld outlined in its recently published Sustainability Strategy that it would respond by taking measures to reduce salt in dough.Sonneveld R&D director Peeter Weegels spoke to BakeryAndSnacks.com about these steps and some potential challenges.“Salt is a unique molecule that fits into the taste buds and replacing it is intrinsically impossible,” he said.Consumer acceptability is therefore a huge challenge when looking at ways to reduce salt-content.First stepHe explained that Sonneveld had begun its salt reduction strategy in 2008 with the launch of salt reduction ingredient Proson Taste.Salt levels were cut from 2% to 1.8%, he said, by using cross modal interaction, which increased the aroma of the product.“Fooling the consumer by salt reduction while increasing the aroma to created a better tasting bread," said Weegels.Next stepSonneveld now aims to reduce salt in bread a further 0.2% by the end of this year in response to the Dutch legislation.Weegels claimed his company could already go to 1% on flour bread using a Dutch bread process, and ran industrial bread processes around the 1.5% level. He said the next stage would be to combine aroma enhancement with the use of enzymes to aggregate gluten to be less sticky in much the same way as salt.“Stickiness can be a serious problem. Reducing salt is not helping this,” he said.Costs for manufacturersAccording to Weegels: “Salt is the cheapest raw material in the bakery area.”Thus, simply replacing salt with flour would be more expensive, and would not produce an acceptable product. Therefore some additional cost is required, he said.He put the additional cost at 0.02% per product if salt were replaced with flour.“If you produce a lot of bread, this comes to quite some money. Taken together in a company, it comes to tens of thousands of euros,” he said.In Sonnvelds view it shows Corporate Social Responsibility if a company coversthese costs themselves, as they did in their salt containing products. 
Arla Foods has announced a strong set of results for 2011, and the company has told DairyReporter.com that this is due in large part tighter ‘global brand’ focus that is boosting its entire portfolio.The Danish-Swedish-German co-operative group reported a turnover of almost DKK 55bn (DKK 49bn: 2010) while profits also grew to DKK 1.311bn (DKK 1.268bn: 2010).Welcoming “strong results in a difficult time”, given the European debt crisis (with 80% of Arla’s business based in Europe), CEO Peder Tuborgh admitted that greater consumer uptake of discount, rather than branded problems, had hurt Arla’s earnings in this region.“But at the same time, we’re seeing a rising demand in markets outside Europe, which will offset the flattening growth in Europe,” he added.Tuborgh noted Arla’s success in Middle East and North Africa (MENA) and Russia, where sales grew by 16% (DKK 4.1bn) and 27% (DKK 540m) respectively, as well as a “major breakthrough” towards becoming a major market player in Germany, following the firm’s merger with Hansa-Milch and its Allgäuland-Käsereien acquisition.Arla, Lurpak, CastelloArla said that half its 2011 revenue growth was organic – the firm is targeting a DKK 75bn turnover by 2015 – and was in part driven by good growth for its three ‘global brands’: Arla (+8%, DKK 20.6m) Lurpak (13%) and Castello (+8%).CFO Frederik Lotz said global brand growth ahead of the rest of the company was very positive, with sales driven by “strategically important products with high added value” and a focus on selected global markets.Arla’s global brand strategy was launched in October 2010, and involves focusing on its three global brands; the firm’s 2015 group strategy involves targeting Russia, Poland (+19% sales growth) the US and China as ‘special growth markets’, but the firm suggested yesterday that 2011 performance in the latter two was more muted.Endless number of brands...Asked whether Arla had benefited from focusing its resources on fewer ‘global brands’, the spokesman said: “There’s no doubt that this is a big advantage to us, and we’ve seen it work almost immediately.“Before we had a global brand strategy we had an endless amount of brands in each market. We’re working on – and we’ve also worked on this over the past two years – streamlining and finding synergies, to build up around these three global brands.“We’re making sure that the brands that did not have potential as a standalone brand, can either become a sub-brand to one of these three main brands, or possibly we just stop producing it. You have to focus your business to get the most profit out of it.”He added: “We had to change some of the products – packaging, quality, so forth. Moving a brand into another brand is a journey that requires product adjustments.“That’s taken a lot of work, but we’re definitely seeing the benefits of that because of the value these brands have is translating to more of our products.” 
Guar gum volatility - industry on the lookout for alternatives Tara gum and locust bean gum are being touted as credible guar gum replacers in light of the high prices and lack of supply for food grade guar, claims a hydrocolloid expert.Dennis Seisun, a consultant with IMR International, in his weekly update on the state of the hydrocolloid market, said neither gum has traditionally been viewed as a strong competitor to guar but he stressed that “at current guar prices, however, tradition no longer applies.”Of the two gums with the greatest potential for guar replacement, the consultant said: “It seems Tara gum may have a better fit with replacing guar functionality. From a volume perspective however, locust bean gum (LBG), at 11-12,000 tonnes available per year, offers better opportunity than Tara which is available in 2,000-2,500 tonne annual quantities.” Seisun said that xanthan gum is another hydrocolloid which is now a very cost effective thickener compared to guar, not to mention starches, and he reckons virtually all hydrocolloids are being evaluated as potential guar substitutes.He notes that prices for food grade guar have reached and even exceeded $14 per kilo. “Landed prices of $15/kg have been confirmed,” he added.However, the hydrocolloid industry insider said that claims and counterclaims are being made regarding availability of guar gum raw material and finished product. “Some say that raw material is already tight and until the next crop appears towards the end of 2012 there will be no easing in guar supply and price. Others claim that raw material is available and that manipulation of the Indian National Commodity & Derivatives Exchange (NCDEX) and speculation in the market is what has driven guar prices above a sustainable and justifiable level,” added the hydrocolloid specialist. Indeed, the Indian regulator, the Forward Markets Commission (FMC) recently launched a probe into irregularities in the trading of guar seed and guar gum.Regardless, Seisun points out that there is agreement that demand in the oilfield sector will set the pace for guar trends, either upwards or downwards. But he notes that “oilfield demand is expected to level off as the hectic inventory build-up undertaken in 2011 eases.”And “for now and for whatever reason, speculation or real shortage, a buyer of food grade guar can expect prices of around $15/kg, unless previous contracts have been signed,” added the consultant.Seisun reports three key strategies taken by food formulators when addressing the guar problem including:  
A collaborative research project between Frutarom Savory Solutions and academia has fed into the development of a starter culture for raw sausage meat that the ingredients firm flags up as enabling a rapid lowering of the pH value while ensuring safety and sensory quality.Dr Christian Hertel, R&D manager cultures at the Germany-based Frutarom division told FoodNavigator.com that while the research initiative with the German Institute of Food Technologies (DIL) only came into effect in the last phase of the development of the new culture, the cooperation “contributed successfully to the finishing of the development work.”BITEC Advance LD20, he said, has been developed for the production of fresh and dried fermented sausage including spreadable and sliceable products such as salami, Zwiebelmettwurst, Braunschweiger, or Rohpolnische.Hertel said the new culture has been tested at the industrial scale and was found to be an excellent culture to combine fast fermentation with pleasant mild taste. “BITEC Advance LD-20 has completely convinced, not only in our laboratories, but also during several trial runs within the industry.”Pathogen control The new culture, which is added to the meat sausage at the beginning of the production process, contains strains of the bacteria Lactobacillus sakei and Staphylococcus carnosus. Hertel explained that Lactobacillus sakei quickly reduces the pH in the sausage meat by lactic acid formation, within 24 hours depending on the formula and fermentation conditions. “Thus, this strain contributes to the product safety by avoiding the growth of pathogens. At the same time, however, this strain provides a pleasant mild taste.” Staphylococcus carnosus, he said, exhibits a strong nitrate reductase and thus contributes the development of the typical red colour of the fermented product. “In addition, in combination with the indigenous meat enzymes, this strain contributes to the development of a typical fermentation flavour,” he added.Academia linkMarch 2011, Frutarom Savory Solutions launch a research project on starter cultures with DIL, an initiative which the company said at the time would eventually propel it into a leading position in Europe in the field. As well as in sausages, starter cultures are used in the manufacturer of other fermented foods such as cheeses and yoghurts, fermented vegetables such as sauerkraut, bread, vinegar, and alcoholic beverages like beer. Frutarom Savory Solutions already offers them to the meat, fish and convenience products industries, as well as savoury flavours and seasoning compounds. It is aiming to shore up its knowledge and capabilities, however, through the strategic cooperation with DIL with the aim of improving the safety and stability of products. At the time of the announcement of the research project, DIL director Dr Volker Heinz emphasised that the arrangement will be “very results oriented”. He added that the institute finds industry cooperatives to be “highly relevant”, but that such exclusivity as has been forged with Frutarom is unusual. "In this project, we will consolidate our comprehensive know-how with Frutarom’s expertise,” he said.  
Arla Ingman and other producers have filed a complaint with Finland’s competition authority regarding market leader Valio, alleging the firm has abused its position to maintain a liquid milk market monopoly, a claim the latter denies.A spokeswoman for The Finnish Competition Authority told DairyReporter.com this morning: “We can confirm that we have an ongoing investigation regarding milk pricing in Finland, but we cannot comment further at this point, as the work is not finished.”So when would more information be forthcoming? “We haven’t been able to confirm the timetable yet, it still depends on various factors. But if there is something to add, then we will issue a statement,” the spokeswoman added.DairyReporter.com understands that the case relates to allegations from competitors that Valio is abusing its position as Finnish market leader (with an estimated 50-60% share of milk carton sales), to sell milk below cost price on a wholesale basis.Valio finds complaint ‘odd’An Arla Ingman spokesman confirmed the accuracy of quotes given by MD Reijo Kiskola to the Finnish press, where he stated the firm’s belief that Valio wished to close out market rivals, and was able to maintain lower prices as packed liquid milk only accounted for around 8% of net sales (2011).Other native Finnish producers include Maitomaa (based in Suonenjoki), Satamaito (in Pori) and Maitokolmio (Toholampi), although it is not known whether these firms are party to the complaint.“Everything points out to their determination to maintain the monopoly position,” Kiskola told Finnish newspaper Helsingin Sanomat.Asked whether Valio wished to respond to the market monopoly claims, a company spokeswoman said: “We won’t give any more comments on this while the case is open. “But as you can read in the newspaper, our CEO Pekka Laaksonen states that (as per our preliminary report), we have made a profit with the ‘basic milk’ unit. And we have kept losing customers due to the price. So it seems odd.”Prices don’t add up?Within the preliminary report in question – published on February 7 – Valio noted that the ‘basic milk’ market in Finland was subject to stiff competition, particularly in the south of the country where the firm held a 35% market share in this segment.“Extensive milk imports from Sweden have cut Valio’s basic milk volumes by almost 25% over the past two years. Due to falling volumes and fierce competition, operating profit for Valio’s Finnish basic milks unit decreased to €11m,” Valio said.But another Finnish dairy industry source told DairyReporter.com that all the market players in Finland, including Valio, were now selling milk at “prices that simply don’t add up”, which they said indicated that there could be something amiss. 
Cornell and University of Hawaii researchers are seeking volunteers to test foods that could be used on a future mission to Mars.The 120-day project requires participants to don spacesuits and live in conditions simulated to be as Mars-like as possible, while helping the researchers to determine the palatability of instant and shelf-stable food over time. Among other goals, the study intends to measure the participants’ food and nutrient intake, examine the role of food in mood, and compile recipes and cooking tips used by the ‘crew’. Participants must have experience in conducting field research and have a degree in in engineering, biological or physical sciences, mathematics, or computer science, among other requirements. More information, including a link to the application form, is available online here . 
The Food and Drink Federation (FDF) announced today that the UK food and beverage industry has been selected to participate in a government scheme to inspire children to consider careers in manufacturing.The project, ‘See Inside Manufacturing’ is a yearly scheme organised by the UK Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS).This year the food and drink industry has been selected as one of the key sectors to participate.Melanie Leech, director general of FDF, welcomed the opportunity for industry involvement in the scheme.“As part of our 20/20 vision for growth, we identified attracting talent as one of the key challenges for our sector if we are to deliver sustainable growth of 20% by 2020,” Leech said.Work is already on-going throughout the industry to overcome this challenge, she said, with the FDF’s careers campaign ‘Taste Success’ but involvement in this government scheme will build on these efforts.It will “help many more young people to see a career in food and drink manufacturing as an exciting and smart choice,” she added.Mark Prisk, business minister, said that the involvement of the food and drinks industry is welcomed.“We want to demonstrate the true value of manufacturing, and this will give young people the chance to see the exciting face of modern manufacturing – highly skilled, high tech and highly paid,” Prisk said.The ‘See Inside Manufacturing’ scheme will commence in June 2012 and involve a variety of food and drink companies across the UK holding open days for young people. 
The requirement for “active farmers” under the latest proposals to reform to the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) could hit those who derive most of their income from activities other than farming, such as food manufacture, an expert has warnedThis element of the CAP reform is designed to stop farmers who convert their land to uses such as golf courses from benefiting from CAP subsidies, said Chris Horseman, editorial director of the Informa Agra, a division of Informa Business Information.However, it might also catch farmers who, for example, had heavily diversified into food processing, Horseman added. He was speaking at a meeting of the food, drink and agriculture group of the Chartered Institute of Marketing in London on Wednesday [February 22].“There is controversy on active farmers,” said Horseman. “This is pure politics.”The European Commission is proposing that if direct aid payments are less than 5% of the total monies received from non-agricultural payments, then those making the claims are not considered to be active farmers and will not be allowed to receive them, he said.Accidental recipients “This is intended to prevent these golf courses and utility companies and various other accidental recipients of CAP money from being able to do so,” he said.“But it is a concern because what happens if, for example, you make most of your money from an on-farm business? Supposing you produce meat pies or something and you generate most of your revenue from a food manufacturing business. Does that make you not an active farmer on this definition?” While an “extreme scenario”, he said this situation could theoretically arise.The CAP reforms will come into effect in 2014, but no final decisions will be made before spring 2013, said Horseman. “Will it make European farming more competitive? I don’t think so,” he remarked. ”I think it is more likely to slow down structural change rather than enhance it.” Reshuffle of resourcesAlthough unlikely to reduce the €55–56bn a year cost to the EU (41-42% of its total budget), as many in the UK would like to see, the reforms are designed to create more ”equitability” by changing the way subsidies are distributed, said Horseman. “It’s a bit of a reshuffle of resources.”Under consideration are three proposals involving a new direct aid payment scheme, a market support scheme and revised rural development regulations.The plans include a greater focus on environmental protection and enhancement, with funds directed at smaller farms and younger farmers and those operating in areas that are more difficult to farm, said Horseman. Payments to larger-scale producers will also be capped.He described plans to simplify the CAP as “a pipe dream”. “The proposals are complicated and bureaucratic,” he argued, pointing out that the UK view on the reforms were “a wasted opportunity” to reduce subsidies for production and concentrate on promoting good land stewardship. But, the UK was only one voice among 27 and unlikely to get its position adopted by the rest, he added. 
Mark Neville, head of lifestyle ingredients at Volac, told BeverageDaily.com that the UK market for whey protein was hitting “critical mass”, since everyone knew someone who used such ingredients, with word spreading as to their benefits.DVN Nutrition is a joint venture between nutrition product manufacturer Volac and Holland’s second-largest cheese manufacture DOC Kaas, which involves producing whey protein and lactose-based ingredients at a site in Hoogeveen, The Netherlands.After touring this facility with Neville, we then discussed trends within the category, and he told us that that Volac - which now turns over around £200m (€236m) - was committed to informing a wider consumer audience (beyond body builders and gym goers), that protein was a vital macronutrient. Protein was in some respects a "forgotten nutrient", Neville explained: “It’s accepted that we have enough protein in our diet, so why should I be concerned about it? Well, part of getting that message across is to say that it’s not just about having enough protein, but also about having the right quality of protein, and making sure you have a good spread throughout the day.” 
Excessive information on health claims on food packaging is perceived as off-putting by consumers, and can have a negative influence on the perception of sensory characteristics, say researchers.The study – published in Food Quality and Preference  – reveals that consumers are greatly influenced by the labelling claims highlighted on the front of food packaging, particularly nutrition claims.Led by Susana Fiszman of the Institute of Agrochemistry and Food Technology, Spain, the researchers reported that consumers labelling of biscuits as ‘non-sugar’ biscuits raised negative expectations of the product and were associated with people with sugar metabolism disorders. Comparison of two tasting sessions also found that the information clearly had a negative influence on the perception of hedonic sensory characteristics, said the researchers.“The objective of this study was to investigate consumers’ perceptions of the package and the expectations raised by nutritional and health claims and the nutrition panel, among other cues – and their influence on the sensory perception of enriched and reduced-calorie biscuits,” explained Fiszman and her team.“The information on the biscuit packaging had a strong influence on the consumers’ perceptions,” they revealed.“Participants’ perceptions were greatly modified when the biscuits were tasted,” added Fiszman, who noted that manufacturers “should be aware of these differences, as it would be dangerous if positive consumer expectations were disconfirmed.” More to follow 
A new model to evaluate probiotic survival in the gut has confirmed that many bacteria strains survive better when consumed in a functional food matrix such as fermented milks – so allowing a greater chance to promote health, say the researchers.The study – published in the Journal of Dairy Science – describes the development of a ‘model gastric system’ for evaluating the survival of bacteria strains in the human digestive system. Using the model, the researchers from the Norwegian University of Life Sciences, determined that some bacteria strains survive better when consumed as fermented milks.The researchers said the model digestion experiments allowed them to simulate with more precision the multiple stress factors that might ultimately affect the survival and subsequent performance of bacteria in the gut."Most of the bacterial strains we tested have interesting functional properties related to food products. We wanted to evaluate whether these strains could contribute with beneficial health functions, or even have the potential as probiotics for human consumption," explained lead investigator Professor Siv Skeie."These results seem to confirm that foods, such as fermented milks, could be a protective matrix enhancing survival of some bacteria," he said.Study detailsIn the research, Skeie and his team assessed the survival of nine lactic acid bacteria (five Lactococcus strains, three Lactobacillus strains, and one strain of Enterococcus hirae), in vitro under conditions similar to human digestion – using human gastric and duodenal juices. The bacterial strains were tested either as washed cells from culture media or in fermented milk. Skeie and colleagues revealed that initial in vitro testing in acid and bile salts showed that Lactobacillus and E. hirae strains “displayed a significantly higher acid tolerance than the Lactococci.” However, in the model digestive system, the Lactobacilli strains showed the highest survival rate. Skeie and collegues also noted that while none of the Lactococcal and E. hirae stains survived in significant numbers after exposure to the gastric juices, their numbers increased in the subsequent duodenal phase. "This could mean that Lactococci and Enterococci are able to resurrect their viability if they are exposed to more suitable conditions like those in the small intestine. This is very interesting because it is in the intestine that functional or probiotic bacteria confer their health benefit to the host," suggested Skeie. In particular, they reported that fermented milk improved the viability of the Lactococcus strains Ar-1, Bf-2, and E. hirae INF E1 during incubation under gastric conditions, said the researchers. Source: Journal of Dairy Science Volume 95, Issue 2  , Pages 558-566, doi: 10:3168/jds.2011-4705 “Survival of lactic acid bacteria from fermented milks in an in vitro digestion model exploiting sequential incubation in human gastric and duodenum juice”Authors: T. Faye, A. Tamburello, G.E. Vegarud, S. Skeie  
Bunge and Senwes taking fire at lucrative South African vegetable oil and protein market with new facilityVegetable oil and protein demand is strong in South Africa driven by a burgeoning population and rising incomes, and global oilseed player Bunge will target these lucrative markets through a new joint venture crushing facility.Bunge EMEA (Europe, Middle East and Africa) and local South African agribusiness player Senwes, are jointly investigating the logistics of building the new oilseed crushing facility and have flagged several locations, but not yet secured land.Henri Rieux, VP corporate affairs of Bunge EMEA, said that analysis into business and logistical issues involved in building the oilseed crushing facility in South Africa is underway and both companies have the “willingness to do it.”The vegetable oil and protein sectors in the country hold many opportunities, Rieux told FoodNavigator.com, “it’s a growing market and we want to be part of it.”The markets are predominantly being driven by domestic demand, but “it is not only South Africa, it’s the region. The countries that border South Africa, such as Mozambique, are also driving growth.”This project is about “combining the strengths of two companies who are willing to develop a food and feed chain, starting with the origin through to customers,” he said.Overseeing the entire supply chain from origin to consumer is a key focus for this project, he added.“To be efficient and sustainable, you need to be a part of the entire supply chain,” he said.Plant plansThe location of the plant is extremely important for this reason as being closer to the origin and farmers lowers costs and increases efficiency, he said, but reiterated that a site has not yet been secured.Rieux said that the new crushing plant will be dedicated to soybean and sunseed, catering to both the domestic food market and feed industry with vegetable oils and protein-rich meals.The target customers will be local companies and specialists in the South African food industry, he said, “they are not bit international companies.”The plant will operate at a capacity of crushing 2,000 tonnes per day to begin with, he said, but there will be the ability to increase this.However, Rieux added that the capacity will not be increased within the first year; “we want a sustainable business, so we will be working step by step.”While a budget has not yet been confirmed, he said that the anticipated cost will be €100m-€110m for a facility of this size.Utilising business strengthsThe partnership between Bunge and Senwes has been on-going for just over a year, Rieux said, and it is a unique partnership whereby both companies have different yet complementary strengths.Senwes has “great knowledge and expertise on the local agricultural market and strong links with farmers; something we think is crucial,” as well as ties with local authorities and customers.Bunge has a “large and very deep knowledge of international markets, we have expertise in risk management which is important as there are big fluctuations in terms of price, which is a risk element for farmers. Bunge is also strong in supplying goods and optimising distribution.”The market will grow rapidly, Rieux said, and the joint business venture will have increased presence, and “in five years, I’m sure we will have other developments.” 
ADM Cocoa has added marbled buttons and layered chocolate chunks to its chocolate decoration range aimed at the confectionery and bakery markets.The additions were made within the company’s deZaan range.Marbled chocolate buttons come in small 2cm pieces for confectionery products, while giant 3cm buttons are also availableFlavours, include milk, white or dark chocolate and also a fruity blend of strawberry and white chocolate. The company has also added extra dark chocolate blends with high cocoa solids.ADM’s layered chocolate chunks consist of two layers of dark and white chocolate suitable for muffins and cookies. The company said it was also offering ‘mega’ chocolate chunks (25mm x 25mm). 
DairyReporter.com asked Albert Adroer, general director of Spanish functional ingredients firm Premium Ingredients, what makes him tick in the dairy world, and also how he unwinds in the fair Spanish city of Barcelona. DR: “Murcia-based Premium Ingredients has identified cheese replacement products and dairy ingredients as strategic growth areas. Why precisely?”AA: “Because Premium Ingredients has been cumulating a long and fruitful experience along the years in this relatively new application. “While most dairy proteins and hydrocolloids or blends producers have focussed mainly on other dairy fields, for the last 10 years we have focused on the processed cheese industry and have incorporated technicians with different expertises in this application.“Moreover, our strategic geographic expansion aims at emerging markets, which demand a strong technical support for the development and production start up of a wide variety of low cost cheese-based new products. “This continued effort has led us to reach a clear leadership in the proposal of solutions for new products development and cost reductions in this field of the dairy industry.” DR: “What interesting new directions in dairy ingredients is Premium Ingredients seeing?”AA: “The economic crisis from 2007 led many cheese processors or industrial cheese consumers to think about cost reductions based on cheese replacement. Therefore there is a search for solutions making possible the production of appealing products at a reduced cost. “There is also a growing trend to increase the consumption of dairy products in emerging markets. This means that a number of cheese producers want to industrialise the production of their traditional products at an affordable cost.” DR: “What kind of challenges and opportunities arise as a result of working in a dairy segment that has now become so international, in regard to addressing different customer needs and demands?”AA: “The basic experience obtained while trying to find new textures or tastes to satisfy the needs in a distant country, is valid to solve problems appearing in a totally different region. On top of this, the demand for cheaper products is today universal.”DR: “Could you tell our readers a little about yourself? What is your career history prior to your current position, where do you live and how do you relax outside of work?”AA: “I started working in the food ingredients industry 25 years ago, initially in commercial management and then in business development until I became the General Manager of Degussa Texturant Systems, today part of Cargill.“After years of living in France and Germany I moved back to my home town, Barcelona, due to family reasons. And a little more than two years ago I was contacted by this small jewel named Premium Ingredients that I didn't hesitate to join immediately! “Today I'm living in Barcelona where it is very easy to relax practicing my favourite sports: skiing, golf and mountain biking.” 
A runaway sales success for Coke in China, Super Milky Pulpy Juice (milk powder, whey protein, juice, coconut flakes) is the firm’s latest $1bn brandConsumer demand for health and wellness beverages worldwide is leading to greater convergence between soft drinks and dairy beverages, according to Rabobank.In the new report, ‘Best of Times, Worst of Times: Global Beverage Outlook 2012’, the food and agribusiness bank’s authors wrote:“The world’s thirst for protein drinks, prebiotics and other functional drinks has led to a burst in new product creations.“The convergence between soft drinks and dairy beverages continues to attract global beverage companies such as Coca-Cola, PepsiCo, Suntory and Danone.”The analysts noted that, in 2010/11, PepsiCo acquired Russia’s leading juice company Lebedyansky and its top dairy player Wimm-Bill-Dann, and had also entered a joint venture (JV) with Saudi Arabia’s Almarai Dairy. In addition, PepsiCo acquired Beyti (an Egyptian juice and dairy concern) and signed another JV with German dairy player Müller to exploit the US market.“Coca-Cola’s announced goal of doubling its revenues by 2020 provides further impetus to also explore newer segments such as hot drinks, dairy and soy-based beverages,” Rabobank’s analysts wrote.“Given the size and scope of these new initiatives, we are likely to see the increasing convergence of soft drinks and dairy beverages around the world in 2012.”PepsiCo sees potentialRabobank’s predictions tally with recent comments made by PepsiCo’s general manager for global nutrition, Sam Lteif, speaking at the International Dairy Foods Association (IDFA) annual forum event last month.Lteif told delegates that dairy had “tremendous potential” within PepsiCo’s global growth strategy, and suited the nutritional needs of all consumer groups.In their outlook report, Rabobank’s analysts picked out ‘segment convergence’ as a key “megatrend” accelerating across all segments, beyond major soft drinks players alone moving into dairy.Beer distributors were also acquiring wine and spirits distributors, while breweries were buying soft drinks brands, they noted, where convergence increased scale and created supply chain efficiencies.Nonetheless, the convergence trend was visible to differing extents throughout the world, the authors wrote.“Convergence between beer and spirits distribution in the US has just begun, as US beer distributors are starting to look beyond a stagnant beer market for new growth opportunities,” they said.“In China, convergence between soft drinks and dairy segments is already well advanced. For example, it has already helped Super Milky Pulpy Juice to become Coke’s latest $1bn brand.”Fastest growing categoriesElsewhere, ‘juice drinks’ and ‘nectars’ were the fastest growing categories within the fruit juices segment, Rabobank said, predicting a rise in global consumption of 3.5bn litres in 2012 to 70bn litres this year, with China, Russia and India spurring growth.For 2012, the analysts predicted that fruit juices and nectars would see 9% and 4% growth respectively, but that orange and apple farmers were unlikely to benefit much, given that most growth was occurring in products with a sub 25% juice content.Consumers were also hankering after more exotic fruit juice flavours, Rabobank said, while other product innovations combined juices with other beverage categories, in new nods towards the convergence trend.“The emergence of smoothies is a good example. The benefits of this category combine different consumer trends in one drink,” the analysts wrote.“At the moment, smoothies still have a small market share within the overall fruit juice category, but in most countries growth rates are significantly higher than for juice drinks overall.”Other emergent formats included fruit juices mixed with carbonated soft drinks and fruit drinks with sports and energy drinks, the analysts added. 
Norway’s largest dairy processor Tine has attacked what it claims is an incorrect press report stating it wishes to raise import tariffs for all foreign cheeses.The co-operative, which turned over NOK 19.387bn (€2.57bn) in 2011, insisted that national daily newspaper Aftenposten had misreported its call for import duties to be increased on a wide range of foreign cheeses. Last Friday the paper carried an article with the headline ‘Tine vil stenge Brien ute’ (‘Tine will shut the Brie out’) but the company said that it had contacted the title to ensure that this headline and other factual errors in the article were corrected.Executive director Elisabeth Morthen, Tine, said: “It is correct that Tine has asked for a percent duty on cheese, but it applies to hard cheeses. Not specialty cheeses such as blue veined, white veined, feta and unpasteruised cheeses.“Amongst these specialty cheeses we find both brie, Camembert, Gorgonzola and Roquefort.”Effectively, TINE wants import tariffs based on a percentage of the price of the cheeses in their home countries, instead of duties currently paid at a fixed rate per kilo, which Norway currently sets at NOK 24.68 to 27.15  across the cheese category.Good Norwegian alternativesBut Morthen said that TINE had no intention of making French cheeses such as Brie, Camembert and Roquefort more expensive for Norwegian consumers“We will, therefore, not ask for tolls on these types of cheeses. We wish to have tariffs on hard white cheese [TINE’s native brands in the latter category include Jarlsberg and Norvegia].”Tine was calling for the increase because hard white cheeses were imported on a large scale – for use at least in part as industrial cheese – but there were good alternatives in Norway, Morthen said.Following negotiations with the EU from 2010, Norway agreed to extend toll-free imports of cheese (then set at 4,500 tonnes) to 7,200 tonnes by January 1, 2012.Tine said that this duty free quota would remain, even if duty were introduced on solid, white cheeses. ‘Progressive’ trade liberalisationThe cheese duty changes form part of a wider EU-Norway agreement on ‘additional trade preferences for agricultural products’, formally concluded last year  and initialled back in January 2010.The agreement allows for regular reviews of trade conditions in agricultural products in view of “progressive liberalisation”, which the EU said would allow its exporters to reinforce their position within the Norwegian market.Announcing its full-year results last week, with operating profits up slightly year-on-year at NOK 1.176bn (€156m) TINE also admitted it had been caught out by the butter supply shortage that hit Norway late last year.“Tine regrets that the company did not spot the collective effect of increased demand for cooking fat products and reduced access to raw milk, so that measures to increase the butter supply could have been introduced earlier.” 
Swiss flavor giant Givaudan has launched a new programme aimed at developing reduced-calorie products that do not compromise on taste or mouthfeel.The flavor company said consumer health concerns combined with a volatile ingredients market are driving demand for reduced-calorie formulations. As a result Givaudan has developed a programme focused on doing so – without compromising mouthfeel. The company told FoodNavigator that its new Mouthfeel programme, which forms part of its overarching Taste Solutions project, enables manufacturers to formulate reduced-calorie sweet and beverage products that sustain the mouthfeel of regular, full-fat products. Minerva Calatayud, global product manager, Taste at Givaudan, said that the programme looks to resolve “challenges in applications, technology gaps and sensory requirements.” “A successful reduced-calorie product depends on rebalancing and optimising mouthfeel, taste and aroma correctly,” Calatayud told this publication, “as consumers will only buy something that tastes good.” All three elements, mouthfeel, taste and aroma are integrated and equally important to the formulation, she noted.Fat and proteins are big contributors to mouthfeel, she said, so if you reduce them it can impact the consistency of a product as well as alter flavour perceptions such as sweet, salt and sour tastes.Under the programme, Givaudan can develop flavour solutions using multiple natural ingredients to create formulations for manufacturers, she said.Natural is increasingly important as consumers are reading labels more extensively, she said, and they expect to see fewer and more natural ingredients listed.Added to this, legislation is becoming stricter, she said, and so using natural ingredients is the fastest way to bring products to the market.Reduced-calorie trendingThere is a pressure on manufacturers driven by both consumers and governments to ‘get healthier’, Calatayud said, and thus for manufacturers to formulate nutritionally good foods.“Most of the food industry, in one way or another, is looking to develop healthier products and mouthfeel will impact all of them,” she said.However, “another reason why companies are reducing fat in products is due to costs of ingredients in such a volatile marketplace,” she added.Both global companies and local companies have expressed interest in the area of calorie reduction, Calatayud said, and Givaudan is targeting manufacturers of all sizes across all global regions.“The large global companies are always the first in the market but the local companies are also very active in developing these products,” she added.Solutions to challengesWithin the Mouthfeel programme, a sensory language ‘Sense It Mouthfeel’ has been developed to better understand the mouthfeel challenges manufacturers face when formulating reduced-calorie products, Calatayud said.This comprises of extensive descriptions and references that relate to the mouthfeel of a product, enabling the trained sensory panel to clearly identify their perceptions when validating a formulation, she said.Each food segment has a dedicated ‘language’, she said, due to the specific, complex nature of mouthfeel. Givaudan has sub-categorised its language into beverages, dairy, bakery, savoury and snacks.For example, in the dairy segment there are key words such as ‘creamy’, ‘melting’ and ‘fatty’.It is important to be “very accurate when we define the challenges and then define the solutions,” she added.“We are constantly developing new ingredients and sensory knowledge,” and providing solutions to what our consumers want and customers need, Calatayud said. 
Replacing fats and oils with fibre in the form of inulin could lead to 70% reductions in fat, whilst maintaining good taste and functionality, in bakery products, according to new research.The study – published in the Journal of Food Science – assessed the effects and physicochemical properties of fat replacement by inulin in a sponge cake.The researchers, led by Julia Rodríguez-García of the University Politècnica de València, Spain, reported that oil substitution for inulin in the sponge cake formulations led to reductions in fat content by up to 70%.Rodríguez-García and her team said they had achieved the reformulation “of a standard sponge cake recipe to obtain a new product with additional health benefits and [that is] accepted by consumers.” “These high-quality products can be labelled as ‘reduced in fat’ according to U.S. FDA and EU regulations,” explained the researchers. Fat reductionThe authors noted that nutrition-related diseases are increasing “because, among others, energy intake is too high and dietary fibre intake is below recommendations.” “Because of diet and health concerns, consumers have been urged to consume less fat and more food containing complex carbohydrates,” they said. “As fat has the highest energetic value of all major food constituents, a promising way for the food industry to provide advantageous food is to replace fat by dietary fibre ...So, in response to dietary guidelines and health goals, the food industry has introduced a variety of innovative food products designed to help consumers lower their fat intake,” they said.Inulin has been used to replace fat in several foods, including meat and dairy products, whilst gathered inulin is used in several products such as butter-like products, frozen desserts, sauces, and soups. Study detailsRodríguez-García and her team investigated the effects of several fat replacement levels (0%, 35%, 50%, 70%, and 100%) by inulin in a sponge cake microstructure. They reported that the substitution significantly decreased batter viscosity, which gave an evenly distribution of bubble sizes – though the bubbles were found to be larger than the control cake.“The absence of oil—which acts as an interface, stabilizing air bubbles—gave place to a less aerated structure after baking,” said Rodríguez-García. The remaining fat was observed to be located at the bubbles’ interface, “enabling an optimum crumb cake structure development during baking,” they said.“Cakes with fat replacement up to 70% had a high crumb air cell values; they were softer and rated as acceptable by an untrained sensory panel,” said Rodríguez-García and her colleagues, adding that cake made with up to 70% fat replacement “did not differ significantly from the control in all the sensory attributes scored.” “So, a good quality cake with a 70% of oil replacement can be achieved, and it can be labelled as ‘reduced in fat’ according to U.S. and EU regulations,” they confirmed.Rodríguez-García and her colleagues said that further research could investigate ingredients that stabilize air bubbles in fat replaced cakes containing with inulin.Bakery Formulation conferenceThe first virtual conference for bakery formulation will focus on the future of value added ingredients for bakery and cereal lines. Leading experts will talk on subjects from formulation to maintaining margins, managing costs through innovation. Click here to find out more .  Source: Journal of Food Science Volume 77, Issue 2,  pages C189–C197, doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3841.2011.02546.x “Optimization of a Sponge Cake Formulation with Inulin as Fat Replacer: Structure, Physicochemical, and Sensory Properties”Authors: J. Rodríguez-García, A. Puig, A. Salvador, I. Hernando 
Yakult Danone India has announced that it has launched probiotic health drink Yakult onto the Southern Indian market, with the product now on sale in the city of Hyderbad.Yakult was launched in India in 2007 and is presently available in Delhi NCR, Mumbai, Pune, Bangalore, Jaipur, Chandigarh and Punjab.Kiyoshi Oike, MD, Yakult Danone India said: “Awareness about probiotic foods is fast catching up in India and Yakult has seen wide consumer acceptance in the metros. "We have established a strong presence in north India, and are now focusing on the southern markets with the aim to educate and propagate the health benefits of probiotics among consumers. Innovation and information dissemination on probiotics has been fundamental to our growth across geographies making us global leaders.”Jochen Ebert, MD, Danone Food and Beverages said: “The Yakult Danone alliance in India is a result of the teamwork of two global giants in the probiotic industry. Faced with the formidable task of introducing a new market for probiotics in India, the JV company has established a strong probiotic category in a remarkably short span of time.”In India, Yakult is priced at Rs.50 (76 euro cents) for a pack of five bottles, and is manufactured at a facility at Sonepat, Haryana, near Delhi.Yakult was first launched in Japan in 1935, and the company claims it is the bestselling probiotic drink globally with more than 30m consumers across 32 countries. Yakult Danone India is a 50:50 joint venture between Danone and Yakult, formed in 2005 to manufacture and launch probiotic products onto the Indian market. 
The added bureaucracy of legal limits for acrylamide in foods is preventable as industry efforts to reduce levels have been sufficient, says the Food and Drink Federation (FDF).Research over the last decade has found varying amounts of acrylamide in baked goods and coffee cooked at high temperatures, which could lead to an increased cancer risk in humans.The industry has been working towards solutions while regulatory authorities, such as the UK’s Food Standards Agency (FSA), have begun to assess acrylamide levels in food.There are currently no legal control measures for acrylamide in foods in the EU and US.Legal limits prematureMartin Turton, Biscuit, Cake, Chocolate and Confectionery sector group (BCCC - a division of the FDF) manager, told BakeryAndSnacks.com why the industry would not welcome legal limits.“The need for regulation is not there. The industry is concerned at looking at the toolbox so regulation is not required”FoodDrinkEurope released a toolbox  shared with the Grocery Manufacturers of America (GMA) or manufacturers detailing potential intervention steps to reduce acrylamide exposure.Turton suggested these steps were adequate as the industry could self-regulate.“The less red tape the better. The risk to public health at the levels found in food is still unclear.”“However as a precautionary approach, manufacturers should aim to reduce levels based on the principle of ALARA (As Low As Reasonably Achievable).”FSA investigationThe FSA is currently measuring acrylamide levels in carbohydrate rich foods cooked at high temperatures.It is comparing levels against indicative values  set by the European Commission to determine when a product is high in acrylamide.These values vary depending on the product with cereal based foods aimed at babies having the lowest threshold. Where levels are found to be high, FSA will assess the steps a manufacturer has taken to limit levels, including using FoodDrinkEurope’s toolbox.“A lot of products conform in any case,” said Turton.Reducing riskMeasures to reduce acrylamide levels vary depending on the type of food, said Turton. For example a dry product may require different methods to a wet product, he said.“There is no silver bullet. However, there are some basic tools applicable to all foods” he added.Products baked at the lower end of the colour specification can reduce acrylamide levels up to 20%, he said, which would be appropriate for all foods.Some methods could lead to cost savings for manufacturers, while others, such as those requiring reformulation, could lead to considerable expense.He said that manufacturers would need to conduct trials using the toolbox and see which prevention methods work best for them.Many large companies are already doing this, he said, but small companies are some way behind.The HistoryIn 2002, the Swedish National Food Administration  (NFA) discovered acrylamide in commonly consumed baked goods.Over the last decade, authorities such as the FSA, the European Commission and the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have looked at ways to reduce levels.A study from the National Toxicology Programme  (NTP) in the US last year added to the growing body of evidence that acrylamide is a human carcinogen. 
Prolonged consumption of a fructose rich diet does not lead to increases in blood pressure, according to the findings of a new systematic review of the evidence.The study – published in the journal Hypertension – found no evidence to suggest that fructose increases blood pressure when it is eaten for more than seven days, despite previous research revealing that fructose consumption leads to immediate rises blood pressure.In fact, the researchers, led by Dr David Jenkins and Dr John Sievenpiper, observed a significant decrease in diastolic blood pressure in people who had eaten fructose for an extended period of time."A lot of health concerns have been raised about fructose being a dietary risk factor for hypertension, which can lead to stroke, cardiovascular disease, renal disease and death," said Vanessa Ha – first author of the review."We wanted to determine whether fructose itself raised blood pressure, or if the apparent harm attributed to fructose was simply because people are eating too many calories," she said.She explained, for example, that we know people are consuming more soft drinks than ever, “but is it the fructose, the extra calories, or possible other factors that are adding to their illnesses?”Fructose risk?Fructose is a simple monosaccharide sugar that is found in many foods. Fruits are the primary source of naturally occurring fructose, though the molecule found in fruits and vegetables is the same found in high-fructose corn syrup that is used in processed foods and beverages.The researchers noted that previous research has raised concerns over possible adverse effects of fructose on blood pressure.Last year research data from over 2500 people from the United States and the UK found that high intakes of sugar sweetened beverages are linked with increases in blood pressure – whilst a meta-analysis of 11 research trials found links between consumption of the sugar and diabetes risk to be “clear and consistent.”Systematic reviewIn the new review and meta-analysis, Ha and her colleagues pooled the results of 13 controlled feeding trials which investigated the effects of fructose on blood pressure in people who had ingested fructose for more than seven days.The 352 participants included in their analysis consumed an average of 78.5g of fructose every day for around four weeks.Ha and her colleagues reported overall that fructose intake in isocaloric exchange for other carbohydrates significantly decreased diastolic and arterial pressure.“There was no significant effect of fructose on systolic blood pressure,” they added.“Contrary to previous concerns, we found that isocaloric substitution of fructose for other carbohydrates did not adversely affect blood pressure in humans,” said the authors.They added that longer and larger research trials are now needed to confirm the results of their systematic review.  Source: Hypertension  Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1161/​HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.182311 “Effect of Fructose on Blood Pressure: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Controlled Feeding Trials”Authors: V. Ha, J.L. Sievenpiper, R.J. de Souza, L. Chiavaroli, D.D. Wang, et al 
The World’s first burger made entirely from laboratory grown test-tube meat could be ready 'by fall' say the team of Dutch researchers behind the project.With the world facing an ever-increasing population, and a growing demand for meat products, the idea of growing meat in vitro could offer the beginning of a new solution, said Dr Mark Post of Maastricht University.Post is working on an efficient way to produce skeletal muscle tissue in a laboratory that exactly mimics meat – something he believes could eventually replace the entire meat-animal industry.Speaking at a symposium titled "The Next Agricultural Revolution" at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Dr Post revealed that the ingredients for his first burger are still “in a laboratory phase."  However, the researcher added that the group "have committed ourselves to make a couple of thousand of small tissues, and then assemble them into a hamburger" – something he believes will be achieved within a few months.Man-made meatThe researchers are currently working on producing a burger from around 10,000 stem cells extracted from cattle. The cells are left to multiply by more than a billion times, producing muscle tissue that will then be used to make burgers.The project is funded with 250,000 euros from an anonymous private investor, who Dr Post revealed is motivated by "care for the environment, food for the world, and interest in life-transforming technologies."Sustainable meat?Speaking in a previous interview with FoodNavigator, Dr Post said the ‘proof of principle’ research project could begin a movement to more sustainable meat production.He said that whilst his team are currently aiming to produce small strands of meat which can then be processed to produce “burgers and sausage type foods,” the long term goals of the project “have to be to grow much larger pieces of meat, such as steaks and chops.”“Hopefully this will create enough enthusiasm and financial support to upscale and economise the processes, so that we can improve and start to think about a real manufacturing process,” said Post.FoodNavigator spoke to Dr Mark Post in podcast on this subject earlier in the project. Click here to listen to the interview .Meat alternativesAlso speaking at the symposium, Patrick Brown of the Stanford University School of Medicine,USA, commented that "animal farming is by far the biggest ongoing global catastrophe.”"More to the point, it's incredibly ready to topple,” he warned. “It's inefficient technology that hasn't changed fundamentally for millennia.”Brown, who revealed that his research is funded by an American venture capital firm, said he will devote the rest of his life to develop products that mimic meat but are made entirely from vegetable sources.The researcher said he is working "to develop and commercialise a product that can compete head on with meat and dairy products based on taste and value for the mainstream consumer, for people who are hard-core meat and cheese lovers who can't imagine ever giving that up, but could be persuaded if they had a product with all taste and value." 
Kerry Group 2011 revenue pegged at €5.3bnFavourable consumer trends for healthy formulations and natural flavours ensured steady growth in the ingredients and flavours segment of Kerry Group.In results published today, the Ireland-headquartered company pegged its 2011 earnings at €5.3bn, with a ‘milestone’ trading profit of €501m and an overall earnings growth of 6.9% for 2011.It detailed a steady performance in its ingredients and flavours division, pegged at €3,706m with a 7.7% LFL (like-for-like) growth for 2011 and weaker results for its consumer products business, valued at €1,674m with just a 3.2% LFL growth.Consumer trends for natural flavours and healthier formulations favour our technologies, Frank Hayes, director of corporate affairs, told FoodNavigator.com.“Our ingredients and flavours business has the broadest range and greatest depth of technologies that can meet consumer requirements,” Hayes said.The group’s 2011 performance delivered on objectives set despite the continuing economic challenges, he said, referencing high raw material costs, input cost inflation and weak consumer confidence.Joe Gill, a broker with Dublin-based Bloxham Stockbrokers, said that the results while very assuring, feature no major positives or negatives and are not surprising, just steady.“Stable growth has been the pattern of Kerry for many years. It believes in a steady growth of between 8-12% a year and so the company is very pleased with these results,” Gill said. ‘Solid’ ingredients and flavours performanceTakings grew across all technology sectors within the ingredients and flavours business arm with beverage systems performing strongest with a 12.6% growth, followed by pharmaceutical, nutritional and functional ingredients (9.1%), savoury and dairy systems (7.9%) and cereal and sweet systems (5.4%). The group said that innovation continues within this sector driven by consumer demand for ‘free-from foods’, reduced fats and salts, naturals and enhanced dietary and nutritional products.James Targett, senior analyst at private banking firm Berenberg Bank, said that increased consumer demand for reformulation is driving growth in the ingredients and flavours segment of Kerry Group.He noted the segment saw a “very solid performance… with a strong underlying growth and resilient margins.”Changing growth strategiesIn December Kerry purchased Cargill’s global flavours unit for €170m (US$230m) marking part of the group’s wider growth strategy and dedication to flavours and food ingredients.A total of €386.4m was pumped into acquisitions in 2011, but Gill said fewer funds will be committed to external growth in 2012.“Despite the group having the fire power to do so, I’d assume that the focus will be on internal growth instead of acquisitions in 2012… I would imagine the spend [on acquisitions] will be closer to €250m, so slightly less,” Gill said.However, Kerry today confirmed the completed acquisition of South African flavours company FlavourCraft for an undisclosed sum, a move it said signalled its commitment to expansion across the African continent.FlavourCraft specialises in the development of flavours for meats, soups, sauces, dressings and savoury snacks in the South African and sub-Saharan markets, particularly Nigeria.In the annual figures released today, the largest sales growth for 2011 was realised in the Asia Pacific region, with a 12% LFL growth driving revenues to €605m and a business volume growth of 10%.EMEA (Europe, the Middle East and Africa) sales were pegged at €1,475m with revenues from the Americas pulling in just over at €1,558m. 
Ingredients firm CSM has taken a 30% profit plunge in its 2011 results as it looks to refocus its strategy, which will lead to job losses.The company’s EBITA slid to €150.8m as consumers in both Europe and North America opted for lower priced products and raw material price hikes put margins under pressure.CSM has conducted a restructured business review in a bid to reverse its fortunes that includes a focus on convenience products, such as frozen bakery.The move will mean 100 jobs will be lost.Artisanal outCompany CEO Gerard Hoetmer said: "2011 was a very challenging year for us. We faced substantial raw material cost inflation in a difficult consumer environment impacting our volumes in an intensified competitive landscape. “This put our 2011 results under severe pressure and led to a disappointing EBITA level.”Net sales for the year were up 4.1% to €3.1bn, though profits suffered a 30% decline. Profits in Europe were worst hit, down almost 38% to €61.8m.Hoeter said this was down to a shift from traditional artisan bakery channels towards in-store and out-of-home bakery, triggered by consumers tightening purse strings in a tough economic environment.Out-of-home and in-store inThe shift led to declining sales volumes for CSM in North America and Western and Southern Europe.The company said it would look to cheaper products to return to growth, including the frozen segment.In October last year, CSM issued a Relevance Cost reduction plan, which it claims will save it €30m in 2012 and a further €20m when the programme is realised in 2013.So far this has meant 400 employees have been axed. A further 100 jobs are expected to go before the full cost reduction plan is completed by 2013.Last month, the company acquired UK biscuit firm Cookie Man to leverage its position in out-of-home markets.2012 outlookThis year is expected to be a transitional year for CSM.“It is clear that the trading environment in 2012 will remain very challenging,” said Hoeter.The company said consumer confidence remained fragile, which could impact demand. Raw material prices are also expected to remain high. 
Policy is needed to underpin export growth in IrelandGrowth opportunities in Ireland’s food and drink export market will continue amid volatile domestic conditions, but government policies need to align with and underpin industry growth strategies, according to Food and Drink Industry Ireland (FDII).The FDII released its growth strategy report Hungry to Grow today which outlined priorities for the food and beverage industry in 2012, noting that it should build on the growth achieved in the export market over recent years.The report also detailed key policy recommendations and focuses needed to underpin successful growth.Paul Kelly, director of FDII, said that there is a “very good export growth outlook in the short and mid-term” and the report has been compiled to ensure further strong, coordinated, strategic growth.“Policies across government need to align with the growth strategies of the food and drinks industry,” Kelly told FoodNavigator.com.“Currently, there are a number of proposals that would be at odds with that," he added.Policy recommendationsThe new FDII report suggested the government avoid proposed discriminatory taxes on food and packaging as they are “regressive by nature”.“We don’t want sugar tax full stop, as there is a value-added tax already,” Kelly said, and we don’t see a need for a packaging tax as industry has already met and exceeded EU targets for environmental packaging.Manufacturers are already obliged to join the Producer Responsibility Scheme where reduced or recyclable packaging is used and this is sufficient, he added, and so “an unambiguous and unwavering commitment from government that it will not apply discriminatory taxes to food packaging” is needed. Growing on growthEnsuring growth requires the leadership of export companies as well as a public policy framework that supports growth, Kelly said.Focus will need to be on increased raw material supplies, improved cost competitiveness, innovation, increased capacity utilisation and expansion, improved marketing and market, he said.Despite good export figures for 2011, “success should not be taken for granted,” he added.The report noted that “policy alignment and joined-up thinking is critical” and that policies should align with the FDII’s Food Harvest 2020 strategy that has a target of a 42% surge in the export market to €12bn by 2020. Ireland’s food board, Bord Bia, pegged food and drink exports for 2011 at €8.85bn indicating a 12% surge in the sector, driven by balance in supply and demand and reduced volatility in the European market.Data showed that the strongest categories driving growth were dairy (€2.6bn), meat (€2.59bn), prepared foods (€1.5bn) and seafood (€420m).“The industry is very dynamic and is looking for exports across the globe... The success in the export market is, and will continue to be, underpinned by quality and traceability,” Kelly said. 
Food products with high phosphate contents are damaging to the health of the general public, and as such should be labelled, say researchers behind a new study.The report – published in Deutsches Ärzteblatt International – selectively reviewed research documenting the links between excessive phosphate and elevated risks of ill health and mortality – calling for a ‘traffic-light’ labelling system to be introduced for foods containing phosphate additives.The researchers, led by Professor Eberhard Ritz of Nierenzentrum Heidelberg, Germany, reported that elevated serum phosphate concentrations have been found to be correlated with mortality in people with chronic renal failure, while high levels of phosphates in healthy people have been correlated with cardiovascular disease. Ritz and his colleagues said they believe that “the public should be informed that added phosphate is damaging to health.”    “Furthermore, calls for labelling the content of added phosphate in food are appropriate,” they added.PhosphatesNatural (organic) phosphate esters are found mainly in protein-rich foods, including dairy products, fish, meat, sausages, and eggs. Ritz and his team explained that these compounds are slowly broken down in the gastrointestinal tract and then slowly resorbed from the intestine.“About 40% to 60% of the organic phosphate esters consumed in the diet are resorbed,” they said.However, they noted that the phosphate content of industrially processed food is much higher than that of natural food, because polyphosphates are commonly used as an additive in industrial food production. Such ingredients can legally be added to food as preservatives, acidifying agents, acidity buffers, and emulsifying agents, whilst phosphate salts are also used in foods to intensify flavours, they said.Phosphate additives also play an especially important role in the meat industry, where they are used as preservatives. They are also used as a component of melting salts in the production of soft cheeses and are found in flavoured soft drinks and powdered products.“Because of the increased use of food additives, the estimated daily intake of phosphate-containing food additives has more than doubled since the 1990s, from just under 500 mg/day to 1000 mg/day,” said Ritz and colleagues.They noted that over 300 food additives have been approved for use in the European Union, with each given a “uniform designation” E number which must be marked on food packaging.“The labelling requirement is, unfortunately, only qualitative, and not quantitative,” said the researchers. “The consumer ... cannot determine how much phosphate is actually present in each item, as neither the overall phosphate content nor the quantity of added phosphate is indicated.”‘Need for action’ “In view of the known connection between dietary phosphate and organ calcification in patients with renal failure, as well as the growing realization that phosphate can damage health even in persons with normal kidneys, one may ask whether concrete interventions in health policy ought to be taken now, even though such steps cannot yet be supported by any findings from prospective interventional trials,” said Ritz.  The authors said one important step would be to inform physicians and the public thoroughly about the potential risks to cardiovascular and renal function arising from dietary phosphate consumption. However they added that “comprehensive labelling of phosphate additives in food – ideally, with a “traffic-light” scheme – would also be desirable.”“The amount of added phosphate, whether low, medium, or high, should be indicated with a green, yellow, or red sign on the package,” they said noting that Finland and the United Kingdom already use similar systems to indicate salt content.“In order for such measures to be implemented, support should be sought from the food industry, consumer protection organizations, medical societies, and governmental and quasi-governmental entities,” said Ritz and his team. Source: Deutsches Ärzteblatt International   Volume 109, Issue 4, Pages 49-55; doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2012.0049 “Phosphate Additives in Food—a Health Risk” Authors: E. Ritz, K. Hahn, M. Ketteler, M.K. Kuhlmann, J. Mann 
Altering the release profile of salt in crisps and snacks could help to lower levels of ‘unperceived’ sodium without affecting taste, say researchers.The research – published in Food & Function – reports on an investigation into how salt from potato crisps is released and perceived in the mouth. Researchers from the University of Nottingham, UK, measured the ‘saltiness’ of crisps using measures of sodium in saliva and sensory test panellists. Dr Ian Fisk and Tian Xing, from the University of Nottingham, found a large proportion of the salt in crisps is released around 20 seconds after chewing – at which time the crisp may have already been swallowed.  "The 'salt burst' from crisps is only released into the mouth 20 seconds after chewing begins. This means that in many cases the crisp may have already been swallowed before the majority of the salty taste is detected,” said Fisk“Our aim is to develop a series of technologies that accelerate the delivery of salt to the tongue by moving the ‘burst’ from 20 seconds to within the time that you normally chew and swallow. This would mean that less salt would be needed to get the same amount of taste," he explained.The food scientists said the idea could increase flavour but use less salt, leading to new ways of producing healthier crisps — without impacting taste. They said the research could be applied to other areas of food science and may perhaps lead to significant salt reduction in all snack foods.Salt reductionSodium is a vital nutrient and is necessary for the body to function. However the average daily salt consumption in the western world (between 10 and 12 grams) vastly exceeds maximum recommendations from WHO/FAO of 5 grams per day. Such high intakes of dietary sodium have been linked to negative health impacts, including the development of hypertension, cardiovascular disease, certain cancers, and other health problems.   In countries like the UK, Ireland, the USA, and other industrialized countries, over 80% of salt intake comes from processed food – meaning many do not realise they are consuming such high quantities. Because of this, reducing the sodium content in food products has become a major issue for the processed-food sector. Industry action The process of reducing salt levels in foods is an ongoing process within the industry, with many now acknowledging that high sodium levels in some foods is a major issue for the industry.  However, the reduction of salt in processed foods is a major challenge because in addition to salts role as a flavour enhancer, the food industry has historically added salt (sodium chloride) to foods to enhance shelf life, modify flavour, enhance functionality, and to control fermentation.“There is a clear need for the food industry to identify technical routes to enable functionality to be modified, flavour to be enhanced, and shelf life to be preserved, whilst reducing the concentration of sodium salts and maintaining the consumer experience,” said Fisk and Xing.Study detailsFisk and Xing asked a panel of food testers to chew a crisp a prescribed number of times and hold it in their mouths for 60 seconds. The team monitored the salt level in the mouth throughout the tests by taking tongue swabs and analysing them.They detected that sodium levels peaked at around the 20 second mark, whilst the trained panellists confirmed that they too sensed a significant increase in salt at around this time.Fink explained that the release of salt is “complicated because the salt sits on both the crisp's surface and is embedded in the surface oil.” The researchers will soon begin a research project (working with a range of food companies in the UK) to help them develop effective salt reduction strategies and to solve technical problems surrounding salt reduction. Source: Food & Function  Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1039/C2FO10282J “Salt release from potato crisps” Authors: X. Tian, I.D. Fisk 
Swiss flavour and fragrance giant Givaudan has reported strong sales momentum in its Flavours Division, despite “a challenging business environment.”Givaudan said that sales from its Flavour Division accounted 2.08 billion CHF Swiss francs ($3.01 billion) of its total sales of 3.9 billion CHF ($4.2 billion) – a growth of 5.7% in local currencies. The Swiss company said sales in developing markets increased at near double digit growth over 2010 while mature markets delivered above average growth despite the unfavourable economic conditions. Gilles Andrier, CEO, Givaudan commented that the business “achieved a strong sales momentum in a tough environment and a significant profit improvement in the second half of the year.” “We are well on track for 2012 and to deliver on our mid-term targets,” he said, 
UK consumer advocates Which?, evaluating sugar levels in breakfast cereals, claim manufacturers need to better inform busy parents and other consumers about the ingredients in their cereals, claiming that traffic light labelling is the most blatant way of doing so.But Kellogg argues that labelling information based on Guideline Daily Amounts (GDA) is sufficient, with a spokesperson adding that the cereal giant’s cereal portfolio approach is based on offering the consumer “a real choice”.The consumer orientated watchdog released a report yesterday comparing the nutritional content of leading breakfast cereals per sales in the UK market and private label equivalents, flagging up the fact that 32 out of 50 were high in sugar.“We have compared cereals based on the nutritional value per 100g. This enables us to compare them across the board even if manufacturers recommend different portion sizes. Cereals aimed at children were particularly disappointing, with high levels of sugar found in 12 out of 14,” said Which?The group found Kellogg’s Frosties, was the “worst offender” with 37% sugar. Private label chocolate rice cereal from several supermarkets came a close second, followed by Kellogg’s Crunchy Nut Cornflakes, Kellogg’s Coco Pops and Sugar Puffs. “Cereals marketed as “healthy”, such as Kellogg’s All-Bran Bran Flakes and Special K, were also high in sugar,” notes the study.Consumer choice Paul Wheeler, a spokesperson for Kellogg, told FoodNavigator.com that the manufacturer takes issues with these “kind of reports in the fact that they focus on the sugar content in children’s cereals and rarely on the element of consumer choice involved in purchasing decisions.”And he stressed that Kellogg data shows that it is mainly adult men - 25+ - who buy Frosties. "Adult sales of Frosties are the highest and account for 66% of purchasers," said Wheeler. “We are interested in offering parents a choice in relation to managing sugar levels in their children’s diets. We released Kellogg Mini Max - a brand with a nutritional profile that allows it to be advertised to children - at the end of last year to widen our offering to parents,” continued the Kellogg representative. On the amount of sugar in the Special K brand, Wheeler claims "even a large portion of Special K (and we’re talking 60g) has only two teaspoons of sugar in it – that’s less than a low fat fruit yogurt, banana or blueberry muffin. The fact is breakfast cereals aren’t a large source of sugar in peoples’ diets and they only account for 3.5pc of all the sugar purchased in the nation’s shopping basket each year."He said that every pack of Kellogg’s’ cereals carries GDA labelling "to help shoppers see exactly how many calories and how much salt, fat and sugar is in the products per 30g serving."“If labels are to help shoppers make informed choices they need to be based on what people actually eat. GDAs are based on 30g portions - not 100g as with traffic lights - and this is typically what a child eats in a serving of cereal,” added Wheeler.Label warsThe merits of the GDA approach versus the traffic light system has long been debated in both regulatory and industry circles. In July 2011, the House of Lords in the UK voiced its support for the implementation of a traffic light labelling on food and drink products, and urged stronger government policies to change consumer behaviour. Which? says it takes the view that the evidence to support consumer comprehension of traffic light system for nutritional labelling is there, with the "colour coding making it easy to see exactly what you are buying.”Sue Davies, chief policy officer at the watchdog, when talking to this publication last year, said: "While food manufacturers, in the main are not, half of the retailers in the UK are using traffic light labelling including Sainsbury’s and Asda. And our research along with independent studies testing the various food information labelling schemes indicate that consumers across the board - and not just the better educated ones - find the traffic light approach the easiest to understand." Salt targets met On a positive note for industry reformulation efforts’ the consumer group’s study did find that manufacturers have taken steps to reduce salt in breakfast cereals. "Just eight of the 50 breakfast cereals Which? analysed were not meeting the 2012 target of a maximum of 1.1g salt per 100g breakfast cereal - Asda, Lidl, Kellogg’s, Marks and Spencer and Tesco Cornflakes, Nestlé Cheerios and Kellogg’s Special K and Rice Krispies. “   
New ProTerra consumer facing logo In a bid to encourage more food manufacturers to switch to non-GM soy, cereals and grains, a new not-for-profit organisation and consumer orientated logo has been set up around the established ProTerra standard.Speaking to FoodNavigator.com, Richard Werran, MD of Cert IT, the certifying body that developed the non-GMO standard, said the aim of the ProTerra Foundation, which was established only six weeks ago, is to give the agricultural and food industries “the tools they need to achieve best practice in terms of sustainability performance.”The ProTerra Standard emerged from the Basel Criteria, a document developed cooperatively by the retailer COOP-Switzerland, the World Wildlife Fund, and other industry and public interest groups. Cert ID maintains that since 2006, ProTerra has delivered up to 4.8 million tonnes per year, around 13 per cent of EU consumption – of traceable and verified socially responsible, environmentally sustainable, and non-GM soy. “The 5m tonnes mark was the critical mass required to signal to Cert ID that it was time the standard migrated from a private company to a foundation with the central premise behind the setting up of the new organisation being that it would allow other certifying bodies to take up licensees for the ProTerra standard and thus widen global access to the mark,” explained Werran.He added that a new ProTerra logo has been developed for the retail end to help shoppers identify on-pack brands that are produced without GMOs. “Summer 2012 will see a major European food brand to be the first to carry the new trustmark.” Werran notes that demand for foods produced from non-GMO sources is particularly strong in markets such as Germany, France, Switzerland and Scandinavia. He claims the strength of ProTerra Certification helps mitigate brands’ exposure and liability related to GMOs and the full range of social and environmental issues. “ProTerra also provides the technical basis upon which companies can make strong non-GMO and ethical claims,” continued the Cert IT MD.“It is not just about non-GM soy either,” stressed Warren, claiming that there is huge interest now in sourcing a range of produce such as hazelnuts sustainability.The ProTerra Foundation argues that the growth in genetically modified crops is not only a risk to food safety and food security, but causes a devastating impact on the welfare and lives of farmers and rural communities in countries such as Brazil and Argentina. 
A combination of soy milk, sunflower oil, guar gum, xanthan gum, and some mono- and diglycerides as emulsifiers produced a product that is low in cholesterol (no eggs) and low in fat, but with excellent textural and sensory propertiesA combination of soy milk with guar gum, xanthan gum and select emulsifiers could produce low-fat, low-cholesterol mayonnaise that ‘closely matches’ commercial full-fat alternatives, suggests new research. Writing in the peer-review journal Food Hydrocolloids, researchers from the Ferdowsi University of Mashhad in Iran report that a combination of soy milk, sunflower oil, 36% guar gum, 57% xanthan gum, and some mono- and diglycerides as emulsifiers produced a product that is low in cholesterol (no eggs) and low in fat, but with excellent textural and sensory properties. Big businessMayonnaise continues to be one of the best-selling products in the US. According to a report by Business Week  in 2010, the best-selling condiment in the US is Hellmann’s Mayonnaise with total sales over $400 million. Annual sales for all mayonnaise in the US are estimated at around $1.25 billion, according to SymphonyIRI Group. Commercial mayonnaise is said to contain between 70 and 80% fat, and consumers are increasingly demanding low-fat versions of their favorite foods. Some products, like Nasoya Nayonaisei, claim to be egg-free and low in cholesterol; Nayonaisei is formulated with soymilk, sunflower and/or soybean oil, and other ingredients, including guar and xanthan gums, and sodium alginate. This product offer 3.5 grams of fat per serving. New formulationsAccording to the Iran-based scientists behind the new study, “there is no published data in the literature on application of soy milk with gums and emulsifiers to completely replace egg yolk and reduce cholesterol and fat in mayonnaise”. In a formulation that is similar to Nayonaisei, they optimized a mixture of soy milk, sunflower oil, vinegar, salt, mustard powder, sugar, xanthan gum, guar gum, mono- and diglycerides, and water. Results showed that the best mixture contained 56.7% xanthan gum, 36.7% guar gum, and 6.7% mono- and diglycerides. The researchers noted that a combination of xanthan and guar gums should be used as this leads to the best physical properties, like stability, heat stability, viscosity, and firmness, as well as the best sensory properties, as tested by consumers. “By using desirable levels of xanthan gum, guar gum, and mono-& diglycerides, producing low cholesterol-low fat mayonnaise with properties closely similar to those of commercial ones is possible,” they concluded.  Source: Food Hydrocolloids Volume 28, Issue 2, Pages 344-352, doi: 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2011.12.023 “Optimization of low-cholesterol–low-fat mayonnaise formulation: Effect of using soy milk and some stabilizer by a mixture design approach”Authors: V. Nikzade, M. Mazaheri Tehrani, M. Saadatmand-Tarzjan 
'Cheese War': The war of words between Russia and Ukraine is escalating (Photo Copyright: Ingo Bernhardt)Ukrainian cheese producers must look beyond their ‘unreliable partner’ Russia in an effort to secure new markets for cheese in regions such as the EU, according to a locally based analyst.As we reported last Friday, Ukraine’s three largest cheese producers (have been rocked by an export ban imposed by Russia ) their largest overseas customer within the context of an export market worth $370m (€281m) to the nation.Ostensibly this is due to product quality (claimed presence of palm oil in exported cheese that is fiercely denied). But commentators have pointed to higher political stakes, notably Russian pressure to entice Ukraine into it sphere of influence, notably its Customs Union (with Belarus and Kazakhstan) that removed customs borders from July 2011.Taras Gagalyuk, director of AgriSurvey Agency, Ukrainian Agribusiness Club, told DairyReporter.com that he didn’t envisage a rapid resolution to the dispute: “From the standpoint of Ukrainian producers, it would be very nice if we solved the problem in a few weeks, but at the moment it doesn’t look as if the issue will be solved positively within this timeframe.“This is the not the first so-called ‘food war’ between Ukraine and Russia and we have had to think about new sales before this point – but this is hard issue here now.”Lucrative Russian market“Yes, our producers should have recognised before now that Russia is an unreliable partner, so we have to look for new markets. But at the same time there is no better market for our products, in terms of proximity and market value. So it is difficult to reorient ourselves towards other markets, but we have to look for them.”Gagalyuk explained that, last Friday, the Ukrainian Minister of Agricultural Policy and the chief of the nation’s veterinary service travelled to Russia to try and broker a solution.He said: “They came back with the good news that everything would be OK: there would be a working group comprising Russian and Ukrainian officials, who would check factories that were banned from exporting cheese.”“But then at the weekend our Prime Minister [Mykola Azarov] made a speech, within which he said: ‘There is no palm oil in Ukrainian cheese, it is better than Russian cheese.’ This led to a new wave of negative claims from the Russian side,” Gagalyuk added.Accordingly, on Monday the chief of Russia’s consumer rights protection service, Rospotrebnadzor,Gennady Onishchenko, said he interpreted Azarov’s comments as proof that the Ukrainian minister of agricultural policy had no authority to negotiate a resolution to the so-called ‘cheese war’.Gagalyuk said: “So far there is no working group – no-one came to Ukrainian factories to check them. We are still waiting for further news as to how the Russian party will behave.”In 2011, the three producers with plants subject to export bans (Milk Alliance Holding’s cheese factory in Pyriatyn and its rivals with sites in Hadiachsyr and Prometei), accounted for around 74% of the Ukraine’s total cheese exports to the country, Gagalyuk said.Discussing Milk Alliance Holding’s announcement that it halted production at its Pyriatyn site last week on account of the ban, he added:“This raises the issue of how justified the Russian claims are. Milk Alliance Holding is a public company with shares quoted on the Warsaw Stock Exchange, and it would not be reasonable for them to use palm oil to produce cheese. They’d be clever not to do that.”Instrument of influenceGagalyik added: “This brings us to the political dimension of this issue. Most experts here in the Ukraine agree that is more a political issue, rather than just an issue of technology and production processes.”Expanding on this last point, he said: “Experts here emphasise that this ban is an instrument of influence for engaging Ukraine within the Customs Union, especially since we have not received any official documents about the analysis of the cheese that was banned for export.”Discussing other export possibilities, Gagalyuk said: “After negotiations with the EU we now have zero import duty for cheese, though hard work has to be done to enter the European market. But still this is a possibility, especially in regard to countries in the former Socialist [Eastern] bloc countries.”He added: “If we are successful in this regard then it shouldn’t be a problem to export to other countries such as North Africa, the Middle East, even India. We also need to pay attention to our Caucasian partners, because we still have good connections with them.”Gagalyuk supplied statistics showing that Ukrainian exports of cheese accounted for 80,000 tons in 2011, with 66,000 going to Russia, 8,000 tons to Kazakhstan, 2,000 tons to Moldova, and the rest to other countries. Total Ukrainian export sales of cheese that year were worth around US $370m. 
Danone CEO Franck Riboud admits his company is ‘quite nothing in Asian dairy’, but says the French giant is not prioritising that category within the region, and will take time developing its business there.Riboud was speaking at an investor conference on Wednesday where he announced the company’s Q4 and full-year results for a “tough and positive” 2011 that saw the Danone turnover €19.3bn (+13.6% on 2010).The firm posted like-for-like sales growth of 4.6% in dairy overall: 20.1% in Asia, 13.3% in the rest of the world and 2.4% in Europe, although the firm stressed that flat Russian sales pointed to better performance elsewhere in that region.Noting that per capita consumption of dairy products was very high in countries such as France and Spain at 32-33kg, Riboud said that in countries such as Russia [where Danone merged with Unimilk in 2011] Danone was either “recovering or building a platform for the future”.He said: “We’re not going to ask the French to eat 60kg per year [to spur growth], but when you know that the US is eating 4-5kg per year per capita – and it’s a country that really recovering [economically] at the time being – then the opportunity for us is huge.”Yoplait missed Greek boat...Riboud said Danone believed it would soon overtake Yoplait in terms of US dairy market share (where its Oikos brand has been hugely successful) for the first time, “because Yoplait missed the launch of their Greek, so they are out of the segment”.But after welcoming stable growth in Europe, and double-digit growth in Latin America, Riboud said: “We are not so strong in Asia, which is something we have to think about in dairy.”He said: “The performance of dairy is really impacted by the fact that it is more European than Asiatic. We are booming in Latin America, we are nothing, quite nothing in Asia.” Nonetheless, Riboud said Danone was relaxed about building its Asian dairy presence: “Do we have to do that now? No. Not the way we take care of the global economic context.  “Because we are doing things in baby food in China and Indonesia where we will get a better return much faster, than to spend money to create and develop dairy in Asia.“So we consider dairy in Asia as a pocket for growth in the next 10-15 years. But the priority is how to develop drinks in Indonesia, infant formula in some other countries.”Category developmentDiscussing Danone’s tactics more generally, Riboud said: “Everything talks about the strength of brands, but within Danone the first step of the model is to talk about the category.“Where we are, we want to be locally number one with a big gap to two and three – due to retail and consumer pressures.”“Before that we work on the category, this means developing differentiation, consumption per capita, have the right advertising campaign for the category.”Riboud gave the example of baby nutrition in China, “where we are just claiming Chinese mothers need a specific food, not for two months, three months, but for three years”.“So we build the category, because it’s impossible to develop top-line growth with our brands, if the category is not growing itself. Our job as a leader is to build a category. 
Food giant Kraft Foods has appointed Gerhard "Gerd" W. Pleuhs to lead its global legal team after its current head plans to leave in April.Marc S. Firestone, 52, executive vice President, corporate and legal affairs, and general counsel, will leave Kraft after nine years to rejoin Philip Morris International in Lausanne, Switzerland.His replacement Pleuhs currently serves as senior vice president and deputy general counsel for Kraft.Kraft CEO Irene Rosenfeld said: "Gerd has more than 25 years of corporate law experience. I'm confident that his intimate knowledge of our company will enable him to seamlessly step into the General Counsel role."Pleuhs will lead the legal function for the global snacks company when it launches later this year, while Kraft will search for candidates to lead the North American grocery legal team, originally intended for Firestone. 
Kellogg’s $2.7bn deal to acquire Procter & Gamble’s Pringles will significantly boost its global snacks presence and open existing products up to new markets, according to analysts.The move sees Kellog replace Procter & Gamble’s as the world’s number two snack firm, according to Euromonitor figures, though it is some way off the market leader Frito-Lay, owned by PepsiCo.The deal came as a surprise to Marcia Mogelonsky at Mintel, who told BakeryAndSnacks.com on Tuesday that Kraft was the prime candidate for Pringles. “They were not on my list at all,” she said.Euromonitor analyst Jared Koerten had also said Kraft were likeliest to acquire Pringles.“While Euromonitor International suspected that Kraft had the most to gain following the split of its new global snacks company, it is not a total surprise that another large player would move in to acquire the Pringles brand,” he said today.Global growthKellogg said in its conference call yesterday that Pringles was present in 140 countries and would significantly strengthen Kellogg’s global snacks business. Mogelonsky said: “The buy gives them a lot of room for global growth.”“It opens up Asian markets for Kellogg, where Pringles are popular, and also increases distribution networks for Kellogg in markets beyond Asia (South America, for example),” she said.Kellogg CEO John Bryant said that the inclusion of Pringles would increase Kellogg’s snacks business in North America by $500bn and would almost triple the size of its international snacks business.“It is one thing to have the new shelf space, but Kellogg will probably be wanting to try to use the space to expand its cereal and cereal bar markets,” said Mogelonsky.Depending on its strategy, she said the increased exposure could help Kellogg convince Asians to get more interested in cold cereal.“Or is this the start of Kellogg expanding its snack food into less healthy salty snacks.”Koerten said Kellogg’s current distribution of major snack brands – including Keebler and Cheez-It – was largely domestic/US based. “Pringles, on the other hand, has a geographically broad distribution network that will substantially diversify Kellogg’s portfolio.” “One of the challenges facing Kellogg is that it now enters an entirely different competitive environment with its move into the salty snacks market. It now faces a sector dominated by Frito-Lay“Product portfolio mismatch?The Pringles buy leverages Kellogg’s position in the salty snack category where its presence was negligible.Mogelonsky : “This is the company of All Bran and Special K crackers, FiberPlus and NutriGrain. Now it is also the owner of a typically not especially healthy salty snack.”“It will be interesting to see how the company will balance its ‘good for you’ portfolio of healthy brands with its expanded portfolio of snack foods that don't fit that image,” she continued. “Will Kellogg now change its tagline to ‘The Best To You Each Morning... but at snack time, enjoy!’”Koerten however viewed the addition more positively: “Prior to the deal, Kellogg was not a competitor in the salty snack aisle.” “By acquiring Pringles, the company has expanded its footprint and can now meet consumer demands for snacks in many different ways,” he said.Diamond in the roughKellogg sealed the acquisition from under the noses of Diamond Foods, whose bid to acquire Pringles collapsed after it removed its CEO and chief financial officer over improper accounting.“I am convinced that there must have been a furious behind the scenes bidding war to jack up the price and to explain why P&G let Diamond off the hook without any penalties,” said Mogelonsky.Koerten added that it was not unreasonable to think that other companies would look to acquire parts of Diamond following its lost bid for Pringles. 
An algae-based flour targeted at fat reduction in foods, the first product to emerge from a joint venture between French food ingredients giant Roquette and Californian microalgae expert Solazyme, has just been released onto the European market. The whole algalin flour - a pale yellow powder - contains 50% lipids plus a mixture of protein, soluble and insoluble fibre, and can be used to partially or fully replace anything that was a source of fat, from egg yolk to butter or vegetable, said the two companies. A spokesperson for Roquette told FoodNavigator.com that Europe along with the US are the target markets for the first production phase of the algalin flour.She said that in the US, Solazyme Roquette Nutritionals (SRN) is selling direct or via its own distribution network while Roquette has the exclusive rights for the sale of the products produced by SRN in Europe. The flour ingredient, claims the JV, can improve the nutritional profiles in a multitude of applications, including bakery, plant-based beverages or frozen desserts in that it is low in saturated fats and provides fibre and protein while allowing a calorie reduction and equivalent mouthfeel as a full-fat food or beverage.Product launches by end of 2012“We hope to see products formulated with the Whole Algalin Flour before the end of this year,” added the spokesperson.In terms of bakery applications, she said, the flour offers an alternative to traditional lipids allowing formulators to manufacture baked goods with less fat and/or less egg/egg yolk. “It improves texture and moisture retention in baked goods and offers various textural options for cookies, for example,” continued the spokesperson, adding that the algae flour also performs well in cakes, gluten-free baked goods, and crackers.French production base Earlier this year, Roquette started to produce the microalgae-derived flour in Lestrem, France, where the manufacturing hub of the joint venture is based, with phase one of production there enabling a site capacity of 300 metric tonnes (mt).Phase two of production will massively enhance the tonnage output at the site - 5,000 mt capacity - for the microalgae-derived ingredient - but this won’t get underway until the start of 2013, confirmed the spokesperson.The joint venture (JV), which was formed in November 2010, is also intent on supplying both regions with specialized algae-derived proteins, fibres and oils. However, the Roquette representative was unavailable to confirm a release date on those. Allergen-freeThe two firms claim that technical benefits notwithstanding, algae-based ingredients are also appealing to customers and end consumers because they are non-allergenic and renewable.The two companies found they were able to move faster than they had originally anticipated in Europe because there was no need to go through the Novel Food Regulation.In the US, Solazyme Roquette Nutritionals products have the self-asserted GRAS (Generally Recognized as Safe) status on the basis of scientific studies that prove that the product is harmless. An application will shortly be made to obtain the FDA approved GRAS status, said the two firms. 
A new organic trade deal between the EU and the US will eliminate much of the costs for producers, particularly small and medium scale firms, looking to leverage both markets, claim trade groups.The agreement was signed yesterday at the organic trade show - BioFach - in Nuremberg, Germany by the European Commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development, Dacian Cioloş and the US Agriculture Deputy Secretary, Kathleen Merrigan.The deal means that all products meeting the terms of the partnership can be traded and labelled as certified organic from meats to cereal or wine in the two markets.Increase in trade enabled Amie Johns, Soil Association certification quality manager, told FoodNavigator.com that the mutual recognition of the National Organic Program (NOP) and the EU organic regulations will lessen restrictions on trade, as organic producers and processors will no longer require additional certification in order to export their products. Previously, growers and companies wanting to trade products on both sides of the Atlantic had to obtain separate certifications for two standards, which meant a double set of fees, inspections, and paperwork.“This requirement may have deterred businesses in the past, and so we would expect to see an increase in trade of organic ingredients and products as a result of the agreement,” said Johns. Further commenting, she said: “This is a long-awaited decision that we know has been several years in the making. It is a huge task to come to such an agreement. The EU regulations and the NOP have stricter standards than the other in some respects, and it will have taken a lot of work to reconcile those differences."In the lead up to the deal, the US and EU parties conducted on-site audits to ensure that their regulations, quality control measures, certification requirements, and labelling practices were compatible. Antibiotic usage differs Although there are small differences between the US and EU organic standards, it was determined that the programmes were equivalent except for the prohibition on the use of antibiotics. The USDA organic regulations ban the use of antibiotics except to control invasive bacterial infections in organic apple and pear orchards. The EU rules allow antibiotics only to treat infected animals. For all products traded under this agreement, certifying agents must verify that antibiotics were not used for any reason.Johns explained that this aspect is something that EU certification bodies will be monitoring closely:“The sole condition for products sold in the US is that any livestock products must not have come from a farm where antibiotics are used. This has always been a requirement under the NOP and so producers will have to continue to comply under this agreement if they wish to supply to the US market,” she added.Christine Bushway, executive director and CEO of the US-based Organic Trade Association (OTA) said it was a monumental agreement that would be game changing for the industry and would further create jobs in the "already growing and healthy US organic sector" while being mutually beneficial to farmers both in the US and the EU as well as to consumers chosing to buy organic.The EU Commissioner noted: "This agreement comes with a double added value. On the one hand, organic farmers and food producers will benefit from easier access, with less bureaucracy and less costs, to both the US and the EU markets, strengthening the competitiveness of this sector. In addition, it improves transparency on organic standards, and enhances consumers' confidence and recognition of our organic food and products.”The deal also sees the Commission’s DG for Agriculture and Rural Development and the US Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) taking on oversight roles in relation to organic trade between the two regions and the two regulators will also collaborate on initiatives to promote organic production and tackle important topics such as animal welfare and other issues. The organics sector in the US and the EU is valued at roughly €40bn combined. The largest growth of organic agricultural land in 2010 was in Europe, where the area increased by 0.8 million hectares to reach 10 million hectares (+9 % compared with 2009), according to newly released data from the Research Institute of Organic Agriculture (FiBL) and the International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM). 
Food giant Nestle has recorded modest growth in 2011 driven by strong performance in China and other emerging markets leading its CEO to say wealth potential is moving from West to East.Nestle posted sales of €69.3bn (CHF 83.6bn) in its full-year results, up 7.5% in organic growth on last year, excluding the impact of its Alcon disposal.Operating profit for the group stood at €10.5bn (CHF 12.5bn) with growth led by emerging markets, which accounted for 41% of sales in the year.‘The new reality’Company CEO Paul Buckle said in a press conference: “We are living in a new reality. Wealth creation is moving from West to East.”Nestle saw growth in emerging markets increase 13.3% compared to 4.4% growth in developed markets.Sales in the Asian, African and Oceania regions stood at €12.7bn (CHF 15.3bn), which represented 11.9% in organic growth.In contrast, growth in Europe and the Americas remained in mid-single digits, though Latin America had strong double digit growth with Mexico the highlight.The company is aiming for 50% of sales in emerging markets by 2020. Buckle said: “I think we will get there faster.”ChinaThe Chinese market was a highpoint for Nestle in 2011 with sales approaching €4.1bn (CHF 5bn).The market is expected to grow further through partnerships with domestic firms Yinlu and Hsu Fu established late last year. According to Buckle, the partnerships will enable Nestle to cater to local consumer preferences.During the year, the company established a new R&D centre in Beijing in China as it hopes to drive growth through innovation.ConfectioneryIn 2011, growth in the confectionery segment was led by emerging markets.The company oversaw chocolate share gains in the UK, France and Japan.Performance was also strong for the segment in China, India and Brazil.Nestle chief financial officer Jim Singh said he expects 60% of sales for confectionery to come from emerging markets in the near future.2012 outlookNestle forecasts organic growth to remain constant at around 5-6% in 2012It has a four pronged strategy to drive growth which includes nutrition, health and wellness products, premiumisation, out-of-home leadership and affordable popularly positioned products (PPP) in emerging markets.The company expects growth in emerging markets to continue and will look to increase capacity in these regions.Buckle said: “Key to our performance lies in innovation” The company has invested heavily in R&D in recent years with new centres in China, Latin America and India. Further investment in R&D is expected in 2012.Commodity pricesBuckle said: “Raw material prices are going to stay high”However, Singh added that while 2012 would be another year of volatility, it would not be to the same extent as was seen in 2011.Acquisition strategyNestle will look to bolt-on acquisition in 2012, but wasn’t prepared to say whether it was in for any larger acquisitions.Asked during conference why Nestle didn’t move for Pringles before it was snapped up by Kellogg, Buckle said it was not a strategic fit as the company didn’t have a great presence in the salty snacks market. 
Vitafoods Europe 2012 will see posters sessions for the first time, with the organisers claiming such a development allows scientists to demonstrate their original research for a potential new product or process that is commercially feasible. The Geneva-based trade show said the idea is to have scientists meeting and discussing their ideas and results with exhibitors and visitors to the event – with many of the delegates, they added, venture capital companies looking for investments as well as professionals in the nutraceuticals, functional foodsm drinks ingredients & raw materials industriesPosters Sessions will take place on the show floor from 22-24 May 2012.Selected posters will also be published on the Vitafoods Europe website.Chris Lee, event director, Vitafoods Europe, in explaining the introduction of poster sessions at this year's event said: "It’s essential to help support the increase in fresh ideas and new projects which will keep the industry as advanced and forward-thinking as possible. We look forward to reading the submissions and encourage scientists from across the globe to submit their Posters.”Interested scientists should submit an abstract for consideration on www.vitafoods.eu.com/posters  before 17 February 2012.  
The addition of cyclodextrins to products made from goat’s milk could help mask ‘goaty’ flavour notes, leaving consumers more able to benefit from the nutritional advantages of such products without compromising on taste, say researchers.Writing in the Journal of Food Science, researchers from the Auckland University of Technology (AUT) in New Zealand report on the ability of cyclodextrins – in particular beta-cycodextrin – to block the certain flavour notes of goats milk by binding to the undesirable branched chain fatty acids (BCFAs) that are responsible for such flavour.Using odour ranking trials, the research team found that concentrations of beta-cyclodextrin (beta-CD) between 0% and 0.35% “were increasingly effective” in reducing odours associated with ‘goaty’ flavour intensity – due to 4-methyloctanoic acid.“Following a series of developmental experiments with 4-methyloctanoic acid ... it was found that beta-cyclodextrin was useful in masking goaty flavour in yogurts,” reported the authors, led by Owen Young of AUT. The researchers explained that the fact that beta-CD is already certified safe for food use means that it could be used in commercial goat milk yogurts and similar products. “If used in these products, the real or perceived nutritional advantages of goat milk would not lost to goaty flavour,” explained Young and his co-workers. “Moreover, the market price for these products is higher and more variable than for pure milk, and so can more easily tolerate the costs of additives like cyclodextrins that improve eating quality,” they said.‘Goaty’ flavourYoung and his team explained that goats milk has a different flavour from cow milk – due to certain branched-chain fatty acids in the in the triacylglycerols that make up the body and dairy fats of goats and sheep.The progressive breakdown of these dairy fats during milk storage can create a ‘goaty’ flavour dimension.“In goat cheeses, this characteristic flavour may be sought after by gourmets, but in whole milk the goaty flavour limits market possibilities in Western societies habituated to the relatively flavourless cow milk,” said the researchers.Study detailsThe researchers used odour ranking trials in a yoghurt model to investigate the possibility of blocking the branched chain fatty acids – 4-methyloctanoic acid – responsible for the ‘goaty’ flavours.Concentrations of beta-CD between 0% and 0.35% were found to be increasingly effective in reducing odours associated with the ‘goaty’ flavour. Alpha-CD was also found to be effective in reducing the flavour notes, however gamma-CD was not, revealed the researchers.In further investigations, Young and his team noted that an analytical panel showed the flavour of goat yogurt was reduced by addition of beta-CD – but only if added before heating and fermentation. “A hedonic trial showed that consumers preferred unsweetened and sweet/vanilla-flavoured goat yogurt more when beta-cyclodextrin was included,” said the authors. Source: Journal of Food Science Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3841.2011.02557.x “Effects of Cyclodextrins on the Flavor of Goat Milk and Its Yogurt”Authors: O.A. Young, R.B. Gupta,S. Sadooghy-Saraby 
The gluten-free segment is set to rapidly grow, driven by a wider appeal from health-focused consumers but manufacturers must be innovative with taste and texture amid an expectant consumer group, according to a new Leatherhead report.The study Food Allergies and Intolerances: Consumer Perceptions and Market Opportunities for ‘Free From’ Foods compiled by UK research organisation Leatherhead, details that the ‘free from’ foods market has seen growth in all sectors and countries driven by a new wider appeal.Laura Kempster, senior analyst at Leatherhead, told FoodNavigator.com that with a large proportion of growth being driven by consumers without allergies and intolerances, “there will be an increasing demand for ‘free from’ foods which taste good, are reasonably priced and deliver the health benefit consumers are looking for.”Ingredient and technology innovations will need to be a key focus for manufacturers and suppliers to successfully drive growth, according to the report.“The continuing expansion of available ingredients and methods of processing these will be a key point for development,” she continued, and “many manufacturers we spoke to expressed interest in working closely with ingredients suppliers.”Solutions to improve taste, texture and formulation of the foods and liken them to mainstream products, needs to be a key important focus for manufacturers and ingredients suppliers, Kempster added.Growth and segment opportunitiesThe dairy-free and lactose-free segment is pegged as the largest across the Western European and US markets, worth US$3.6bn in 2010. However gluten-free is just behind at $3.5bn and is flagged as the sector with most growth potential.Almost 3,000 new products with ‘suitable for’ or ‘free from’ claims were launched in 2010 across the US and Western Europe markets, representing 10% of all NPDs that year. Gluten-free was the most common single claim made on new product launches.Kempster said “the broadening of appeal in ‘free from’ foods is led by the perceived health benefits of incorporating these foods into a healthy diet as well as those simply looking to omit certain ingredients from their diet.”“These ‘avoiders’ represent much of the future growth anticipated for this market as they represent a larger section of the population and, in part, because more consumers are tempted to alter their diet as more ‘free from’ options become readily available and as general understanding in this area builds,” she added.No longer nicheWithin Europe, a major move is household, mainstream brands launching ‘free from’ products, she said, such as Warburtons and Arla with Lactofree and pasta brands in Italy, such as Barilla including gluten-free in its range.The presence of well-recognised brands will drive interest in the ‘free from’ category and encourage consumer buy-in, the report said. 
Growth opportunities are being stymied in sectors such as the soft drinks industry due to uncertainty over sugar supply in the EU market, claims a leading UK trade body. Speaking to FoodNavigator.com this morning, Richard Laming, spokesperson for the United Kingdom Industrial Sugar Users Group (UKISUG), stressed that the European Commission (EC) definitely needs to ensure that sugar beet production quotas are abolished by September 2015. “There should be no delays in terms of eliminating quotas from the system - this deadline needs to be adhered to,” he urged, adding that there have been calls in some quarters for the Commission to defer the end of quota system until after 2015.At both UK and EU level, UK sugar users operate in increasingly open and competitive markets, said UKISUG. To succeed, industries from the manufacturer of soft drinks, biscuits, cakes, chocolate, confectionery, breakfast cereals, ice cream, yogurts and chilled desserts must have access to adequate supplies of safe, high quality and competitively priced sugar, it said.“The current system of production quotas and import tariffs restricts the availability of sugar and reduces competition in the EU sugar market,” argues the association. The situation in the marketing year 2010/2011 was particularly challenging in terms of supply in the bloc, with world market prices above EU levels for the first time, and sugar exports from emerging nations, normally imported into the EU duty-free, diverted to the world market to benefit from those more attractive prices. And Laming said production lines in the UK have been hit intermittently as a result of the sugar shortfall. Soft drink manufacturers have been tending to deter investment as a result and growth opportunities have also been missed, added the UKISUG spokesperson, due to the fact the sector has not had a reliable supply of a vital ingredient over the past 18 months or more. “Processors may look to diver investment to outside the EU if uncertainty in supply continues or if the Commission doesn’t take some interim measures immediately,” warns the UKISUG representative. The association is calling for action on imports now, calling for reduced import levies in advance of 2015 to help ensure sufficient supply and to promote greater competition in the sugar market. It also wants a guarantee on adequate imports of duty free cane sugar after 2015 to ensure that “all sugar producers can compete effectively in the market place as well as ensuring security of supply.”UKISUG represents the collective interests of the major industrial users of sugar in the UK, comprising confectionery, chocolate, cakes, biscuits, soft drinks, fruit juices and ice cream. These sectors represent combined employment of 70,000 people and are worth £12.3bn in consumer sales per annum. Manufacturers using sugar in processed products account for about 70% of usage in the UK or nearly 1.2 million tonnes. UKISUG members therefore have a direct and vital interest in the EU's sugar regime. 
Procter & Gamble has struck a $2.7bn deal to sell Pringles to Kellogg after its $2.35bn deal with former suitor Diamond fell through following a probe into its payments to walnut growers.Kellogg boss John Bryant said Pringles would immediately catapult Kellogg into the number two position in worldwide savory snacks and “significantly advance” its goal of building a global snacks empire on a par with its cereals business. Kellogg, which owns the Keebler, Cheez-It and Special K Cracker Chips brands, said Pringles’ infrastructure in markets outside the US would also help it boost distribution for these brands overseas.'There has been some disruption to the business'Speaking on a conference call with analysts this morning, Bryant said the "financially very attractive" deal would add $500m to Kellogg's North American snacks sales and almost triple the size of its international snacks business.He added: "After this deal, our snacks and cereals business will be of a similar size."When quizzed about the recent performance of Pringles, he would not go into details, but added: "It's reasonable to expect that there has been some disruption to the business, and we realise that we need to invest in it, but we are confident in its long-term potential."Asked whether further acquisitions were in the pipeline, he said: "We are always looking for additional bolt-on acquisitions to make our [snacks] business even stronger."Deal to go through in summer pending regulatory approvalsThe companies expect to complete the all-cash transaction this summer pending regulatory approvals, said P&G chief executive Bob McDonald.He added: "This is an excellent development for P&G, Pringles and Kellogg, creating value for our shareholders and representing an outstanding opportunity for Pringles employees with a leading company in the food sector.”Assuming the transaction closes around June 30, Kellogg expects it will generate synergies of “at least $10m in 2012, more in 2013 and ongoing synergies of between $50m and $75m a year thereafter”.Diamond: ‘Positive and constructive working relationship with P&G throughout’Diamond, which recently parted company with its CEO and CFO after an internal probe found it had wrongly accounted for payments to walnut growers, said it and P&G had mutually agreed to terminate their deal.No break-up or other fees will be paid in connection with the termination, said acting president Rick Wolford, who took the helm after it emerged that a $20m “continuity” payment to growers in August 2010 and a $60m “momentum” payment were improperly recorded when Diamond's financial results were published."Diamond has enjoyed a positive and constructive working relationship with P&G throughout this process, and the mutual termination of our agreement and release of all associated liabilities was reached in the same spirit," said Wolford. The biggest markets for Pringles are the US and the UK, but they are sold in more than 140 countries, generating sales of $1.5bn. They are produced in factories in Tennessee and Belgium.Several suitors had been touted as possible bidders for Pringles after the Diamond deal appeared to be turning south, including Kraft, ConAgra and General Mills. Deutsche Bank: Deal makes strategic sense for KelloggIn a note published shortly after the deal was announced this morning, Deutsche Bank analysts said the deal made strategic sense for Kellogg and would increase snacks to about 46% of total sales vs the current 40%."This is important as almost all cultures embrace snacks while few globally embrace cereal."But it cautioned: "However, the stacked Pringles chip is not as unique as it once was, and integration will be challenging given Kellogg's numerous investment needs and difficult core markets." 
Using wheat gluten as a texturiser in cereal bars can produce products high in protein that are fit for the healthy snacking market, according to ingredients firm Tereos Syral The company claims its wheat gluten offering Amygluten can be used to produce cereal bars with an added chewy texture that will appeal to the weight management market.Michel Flambeau, head of the application centre and customer technical support at Tereos, presented a new chewy bar concept at the Healthy bars and grain snacks conference organised by Bridge2Food in Cologne on 3 February 2012.Added chewCéline Hurson, communication and marketing engineer at Tereos told BakeryAndSnacks.com: “It brings a chewy texture that we would usually find in confectionery (gums for example), but without modifying the product characteristics too much.” “Wheat gluten is not a typical ingredient to cereal bars, but as it is extracted from wheat, it remains in line with the cereal sourcing that you expect to find within this product category. Therefore, there will be no issue of ingredient acceptability.” Asked whether consumers really wanted to be chewing for longer, Hurson said: “We don't have any consumer study saying so, but we know that consumers are more and more health conscious.” “Especially, within the weight management offer, satiety and satiation is positioned as a "natural" way of controlling weight and as such, might be appealing to consumers.”FormulationHurson said there were no specific issues with stability or formulation over a conventional cereal bar.She added that the ingredient would not increase the formulation cost for manufacturers.Hurson suggested combining prebiotic fibres with the wheat gluten to produce a product that could rebalance a person’s diet for a healthier gut.She added that as a vegetable protein the ingredient would allow for high protein content claims in the end product.ModificationsIn order to use the ingredient, manufacturers using a cold process would need to adapt equipment as a heating treatment (5 minutes at 110°C) after lamination to allow glycerol to plasticise gluten.Hurson said the ingredient was available worldwide. 
UK chocolatier Thorntons has suffered a 63% decline in profits in its half yearly report and intends to close almost half of its own stores and focus on commercial retail sales.The company said that will close 120 of its 344 stores at a cost of around £4.5m. A further 60 stores are also potential candidates for the chop. Profits nosediveCompany revenues during the 28 weeks ending on 7 January 2012 were flat at around £130m.However, profits were down a staggering 63% from £8.4m in the same period last year to just £3.1m this term.The plummet has been attributed to a decline in own store sales, increased raw material prices and consumers opting for discounted products.‘Need for change’Thorntons CEO Jonathan Hart said: “These results and the economic climate only reaffirm the need for change.”“While our sales emphasis will develop through our commercial channel, our reduced retail estate will remain an important shop window for the brand.”He added that the economic and retail environment for Thorntons would remain challenging and uncertain for throughout 2012.Currently, own store sales account for the majority of Thorntons’ sales at £68.3m, a decline of around 8% on last year.Growth plansBut Thorntons now plans to focus on the Commercial side of its business which experienced growth during the period of 6.8% to £48.3m.International sales also oversaw growth driven by the Middle East. However, the £400,000 international sales boost was slightly offset by declines in Ireland.The build-upIn December last year, Thorntons issued a profit warning and said that it had been hit by weakened consumer demand and strong marketing competition.The company’s marketing strategy was criticised by former chairman Peter Thornton in May last year. Thornton said the company had opened a surplus of shops and claimed that his views were not sought as he was considered “old” and “out of touch”. 
Professor Arne Astrup (Picture Copyright: University of Copenhagen)A leading scientist has challenged the European Commission to reconsider its current targets aimed at cutting saturated fatty acids in foods upon the basis of the latest science.Speaking at the European Dairy Association (EDA) policy conference on ‘Saturated Fat and Dairy for Health’, Professor Arne Astrup from the University of Copenhagen challenged the Commission to do so upon the basis of recent scientific findings.But Stephanie Bodenbach from DG Sanco said that the Commission would stick to the European Food Safety Authority’s (EFSA’s) 2010 recommendations on dietary reference values, which indicate that saturated fatty acids intake should be as low as possible in a nutritionally adequate diet.Professor Andre Huyghebaert (University of Ghent) present at the panel discussion where the comments were made, told Dairy Reporter.com: "I found the event very interesting. Professor Astrup has a very particular opinion on the issue of saturated fatty acids, particularly in dairy products. His main emphasis was on the matrix effect, that the situation of saturated fatty acids in cheese is different from that in butter, for instance."In my opinion Prof. Astrup said some reasonable things in favour of an adaptation of the current thinking on saturated fatty acids, on the condition that there is some consensus to confirm the evidence. I think this work is interesting, but it has to be confirmed by other scientists, so a consensus document can be drawn up to take things forward further."‘'Useful clash’Asked about Bodenbach's reaction to Astrup's points, he said: "She was neither negative nor positive - more neutral, I would say. But I think most of the panel members agreed that you need a kind of consensus document based on scientific evidence, where specialists in the field agree upon the thesis that there are particular matrix effects in terms of saturated fatty acids. Once you have that you can go a step further."The EDA said that the panel discussion revealed the distance between scientists and policymakers, but itself acknowledged the challenge of translating complex science into “clear but not oversimplified messages” that the latter could use.EDA secretary general, Joop Kleibeuker, said: “There was a clear exchange of views between science and policy making. This clash was very useful, because it demonstrated the policymakers’ need for clear messages on the scientific evidence put forward.”Speaking to delegates prior to the discussion session, Astrup said that recent scientific findings indicated that we needed to reassess our perceptions of saturated fat.The effect of specific foods such as cheese on heart disease and stroke risk could not be predicted upon the basis of saturated fatty acids alone, he said, because other nutrients may reduce the risks.Using single nutrients and single risk markets was not the correct means by which to establish dietary recommendations, Astrup added, since people consumed foods not nutrients.Milk and vascular protectionOne of the speakers, Professor Ian Givens from the University of Reading, emphasised the possibility that higher milk consumption over a longer timeframe may offer some vascular protection. He discussed the value of milk and dairy foods in health and tackling disease, pinpointing dairy foods as important sources of key nutrients.A holistic approach to dietary recommendations was needed, Givens added, with the food matrix [recent research indicates that the ‘food matrix’ within which the nutrients are contained impacts upon their health effect] are important and the use of single risk markers may be misleading.Speaking from a political standpoint, MEP Esther de Lange, said that European Parliament decisions on health and nutrition were not simply the result of a clash between committees, nationalities and political visions, but also took into account current consumer needs. 
Increased expectation and perception of a foods sensory properties will increase consumer taste acceptance, according to new research which highlights the importance of effective sensory labels.The study – published in Food Quality and Preference  – highlights the importance of sensory cues on food packaging to industry, and reveals an equation to explain the relationship between the expected sensory qualities of a food and the ‘informed’ taste acceptability of such products.Researchers from packaged food manufacturers and distributors Pulmuone Holdings, Korea, revealed that the expectations provoked by sensory labels increase consumer taste acceptability – with the team providing a quadratic equation that describes the relationship between ‘expected quality’, ‘perceived quality’, ‘informed taste’, and ‘blind taste’.Led by Bue-Young Imm from the research institute of food and culture at Pulmuone, explained that most of the labels presented in the study were made up of product information relating to sensory properties such as taste, flavour, texture, and appearance.“Making an attractive sensory label for a product is an important and difficult undertaking,” said Imm and colleagues.“To complete a sensory label of a food product that induces a synergistic effect on consumer’s overall acceptability, and to apply the sensory label to a commercial product, there must be a quantitative guideline to measure the effect of sensory labels on consumer responses,” they explained.Study detailsThe research team examined the effects of sensory labels on taste acceptance of commercial food products. They designed 12 sensory labels for commercial food products, all aimed to provide a favourable impression to consumers were. Another 12 labels for the same products were selected from the front side of the package.The effects of two factors of sensory labels – expected sensory quality, and perceived sensory quality – and the similarity between these sensory expectations on taste acceptance was investigated.Imm and co-workers reported a significant positive correlation between the initial taste acceptability and the similarity of expected and perceived quality of the product.“When the similarity of expected sensory quality and perceived sensory quality was higher than the expected sensory quality, the initial taste acceptance was significantly higher than blind taste acceptance,” they said. As a result, the researchers suggested that consumer expectations that insufficiently match actual product performance “generate consumer dissatisfaction – a critical limiting factor for commercial food products.”    Source: Food Quality and Preference  Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1016/j.foodqual.2012.01.010 “Effects of sensory labels on taste acceptance of commercial food products”Authors: B.Y. Imm, J.H. Lee, S. Hee Lee 
More holes than Swiss cheese? Chr. Hansen promises faster, bigger 'eye' formation with its new cultureChr. Hansen has launched a new propionic (organic acid) culture for Swiss cheese that it says significantly cuts fatty acid content in comparison with past products, while the company claimed it also has a ‘less soapy and pungent’ flavour than other cultures tested.Citing growing demand for sliced cheese products – Swiss cheese types such as Maasdammer and Emmenthal – Chr. Hansen marketing manager for cheese cultures, Anne-Claire Bauquis told DairyReporter.com:“The demand for sliced Swiss cheese is a trend we see in the US and in many European countries: Poland and Eastern countries but also Germany, The Netherlands and Belgium. It is linked to snacking and consumption for breakfast.”Swiss cheese makers must ensure fast and controlled eye (hole) formation, Chr. Hansen said, while consumers preferred a distinctive nutty flavour together with a sweet mouthfeel.Launched in response to these trends, Chr. Hansen’s trademarked Open IT PS-60 was able to control and standardise the fermentation process, the company said. Touted benefits included high and fast gas formation (meaning a short ripening time) and a well-balanced, sweet, nutty flavour with low pungency due to low lipolytic activity.Successful consumer trialsBauquis said the above properties had been confirmed in consumer trials, and she said that the culture was also cost-efficient due to its high concentration and high activity per cell, with one 500-unit frozen format carton normally sufficient to inoculate 10,000-15,000 litres of milk, and eye formation effective after 14-20 days depending on ripening conditions.According to Bauquis, PS-60 was a fast lactate fermenting culture, robust to different ripening parameters. "Good growth is recorded even in difficult conditions, at low temperature as well as in high salt or low pH environments,” she said.Asked to quantify some of the claimed benefits, and why Chr. Hansen's customers should prefer PS-60 to standard Propionic Shermanii cultures, Bauquis told this publication:"The fatty acid content in cheese is reduced by 30% compared to PS-4, so far the best seller in our range. The flavor was found statistically less soapy and pungent than the Propionic cultures that we have tested tested in the same conditions and at the same level of inoculation."The level of free amino acids released in cheese was also slightly reduced compared to other cultures tested. The flavour intensity was typical of a Swiss/Maasdamm cheese but the intensity was significantly milder," she added.Faster eye formationSpeed of eye formation was first evaluated in a warm room, by observing the increase of volume each week, Bauquis said, with suitable volumes reached about one week ahead with PS-60, compared to PS-4. "Besides, at the same stage , the number of eyes and the size of eyes obtained with PS-60 are higher and bigger respectively, in comparison to PS-4," she added. Quizzed about how long it took to develop such a culture and key production challenges, Bauquis said: "It took two years from the beginning of the screening to the launch. After the characterisation steps, a very extensive number of validations were achieved on pilot plant cheeses. "Many processing conditions were tested and many comparisons were done to other strains from our range and competitive cultures. For example, lactate fermentation, succinate level, lipolysis, proteolysis, amino acids release, observation of eye formation and sensory evaluation by cheese profiling."   
Mars is to reduce the calories in its chocolate sold globally to 250 or less by the end of 2013.Some of its chocolate bars already fall below the 250 benchmark. However, core brands such as the Mars bar, at 260 calories, and Snickers, at 296 calories, are above the threshold. A Mars spokesperson said: “We believe that all of our products can be enjoyed as part of a healthy lifestyle and balanced diet - our commitment to making all our chocolate products no more than 250 calories per portion reflects this. “These changes form part of our on-going efforts to encourage responsible consumption, and will come into effect globally by the end of next year.” 
Gordon: New name 'doesn't represent a change in strategy or a change in the strong business model that we've built'Corn Products International has unveiled plans to change its name to Ingredion to better reflect its role as a supplier of a broad range of ingredients.The firm, which broadened its portfolio with the $1.3bn acquisition of National Starch in late 2010, will ask shareholders to vote on the name change at its annual meeting in May.Assuming it is approved, bosses anticipate a global transition to the new brand and logo over the next two years, with all geographies using the Ingredion name by the end of 2013, said chief executive Ilene Gordon.“The first part of the name represents ‘ingredients,’ while the second part has its roots in the Greek word that means ‘something that goes.’ It says clearly that we’re an ingredient solutions company.”No change in strategy She added: “Ingredion doesn't represent a change in strategy or a change in the strong business model that we've built. It does, however, better reflect the diversity and growth of our product offerings and is more representative of the stronger, more global company we have become." What does Corn Products International do?Speaking to analysts during the firm's Q4, 2011, earnings call last week, Gordon said: "Our model is actually very simple... Fundamentally, we purchase raw materials, largely corn, process them to add value and sell those starch and sweetener ingredients primarily to food, beverage and brewing customers around the world."We don’t operate a commodities trading business. We don’t have a logistics business. And we don’t take physical ownership of raw materials beyond what we need to properly run our operations. Put another way, we are not an agri-business company but rather an ingredient company."National Starch acquisitionSignificant progress had been made in 2011 on the integration of National Starch, with bosses "putting in place IT systems, human resource programs, and re-aligning manufacturing, to name some of the larger projects", added Gordon.While the company had had to contend with "economic malaise" in the US, "recession-like conditions" in Europe, the tsunami in Japan, flooding in Thailand and poor weather in Brazil during the year, "many of our markets remained strong like Mexico, most of South America and Pakistan", noted Gordon.As for south America, where the company has raised prices to offset higher input costs and devaluing currencies, slower economic activity and bad weather had affected results, said Gordon.But she added: "I want to be definitive about our bullish long-term view of South America and encourage you not to draw conclusions from one quarter. We continue to make significant capital investments and are setting ourselves up to benefit from growth in the region." 
Marketers in Sweden are targeting women with new product launches in the energy drink segment while organic and fair trade versions are also showing growing appeal in that market, claims Euromonitor International. Research analyst at the market research firm, George Fulep, told FoodNavigator.com that novel concepts such as Femme Natural Boost, an energy drink developed for the female market in Sweden and - Natural Magic Energy - an energy drink from Magic House Sweden marketed on a free-from taurine, artificial sweeteners, and preservatives platform - are grabbing market share in that country.The Swedish energy drink market is expected to grow by about 27% in off-trade constant value terms by 2016, so Fulep stressed that unique product designs and concepts can help brands capture new consumer categories or greater shelf space. Stockholm-based company, Femme Natural Energy, launched Femme Natural Boost in the summer of 2011, said the analyst. The drink incorporates unroasted coffee beans and is packed in a slim rose colour can, which is, in the main, sold in grocery stores close to university locations. Energy drinks go organic Fulep notes another interesting energy brand launch in Sweden last year was White Tiger developed by First Class Beverages of Sweden. It is a fair trade certified organic energy drink that is available in two different formats: White Tiger Organic Energy and White Tiger Slim Organic Energy with 33% less sugar.Brands that ‟focus on organic and fair trade products are expected to gain popularity from their current low base, even though less than those who focus on one yet unutilized consumer group,” said the Lithuanian-based beverage industry specialist.Consumer migration away from artificial chemicals and synthetics in products is fuelling demand for organic in this category in that market, said Fulep.Dynamic expansion Energy drinks saw dynamic expansion in 2011 in Sweden. The category is dominated by off-trade sales in that country, which corresponded to 87% of total volume sales in 2011, according to data from Euromonitor.Red Bull Nordic remained the leader and took more than a half of the energy drinks market in terms of off-trade value sales. In total, the Swedish off-trade energy drinks market grew by more than 10% in current value terms during 2011, reaching SEK492m (€56m) in off-trade value terms and 8.9 million litres in off-trade volume terms, data from Euromonitor indicates.Leading global energy drink brand Rockstar, while available in Sweden, is not a major player in terms of retail sales there, said Fulep, who said that the energy shots category in the market is also very marginal.Drawing down comparisons between the Swedish market and the UK market, where energy drinks are key products for 16 to 24 year olds, Euromonitor data shows off-trade consumption of energy drinks in Sweden was at 8.92 million litres while off-trade consumption of energy drinks in the UK reached 399 million litres in 2011. 
Kraft Foods is the likeliest candidate for Procter & Gamble’s Pringles brand after a deal with Diamond Foods looks lost, though other candidates may be lurking, according to analysts.BakeryAndSnacks.com asked market analysts from Mintel and Euromonitor which firms were prime candidates for Pringles after Diamond Foods put its $1.5bn deal in jeopardy by removed its CEO and chief financial officer over improper accounting.Kraft Foods proved the resounding favourite.Kraft in pole positionKraft – Mintel’s Marcia Mogelonsky and Euromonitor’s Ildikó Szalai and Jared Koerten saw Kraft as the perfect fit following its split into a Global Snacks and American Grocery division.“The new snacks division could benefit from acquiring a large, established brand like Pringles. The company is certainly able to afford such an acquisition,” said Koerten.Mogelonsky added that Kraft’s strong showing in 2011 puts it in a good position to make a deal on the scale the Pringles buy would demand.Szalai said the buy could fill any potential geographical gaps the group may still have and would boost sales in smaller markets, such as South Korea, Taiwan or Vietnam.Other big namesConAgra – Mogelonsky touted ConAgra as the strongest North American suitor on the heels of losing out on Post cereals from Ralcorp.General Mills – Koerten tipped General Mills to be among the three best-placed candidates, though the company was not mentioned in Mogelonsky and Szalai’s comments.Frito-Lay/Pepsico – Both Koerten and Mogelonsky said that Frito Lay was out of the running due to potential competition concerns and the company’s poor performance over the last year.OutsidersSnyder’s Lance – Smaller candidate Snyder’s Lance could significantly boost its global presence with the Pringles brand, but a deal is perhaps not within its resources for now, according to Koerten and Mogelonsky.Asian firms – “Don’t discount the potential of Asia,” said Mogelonsky. She listed a series of Asia firms, including China’s Bright Foods, Want-Want Holdings and Korea’s Orion Confectionery Company, that may consider a deal for Pringles.Diamond Foods– All three analysts said that the Diamond deal was all but over. Szalai said that although the sale had not yet been terminated, the brand could eventually come up for sale again. Koerten even said it was not unreasonable to think that other companies would look to acquire parts of Diamond at this point.The potential of PringlesThe market analysts said that while any deal for Pringles would be expensive, the potential for any snacks firm’s was great.“Whoever buys Pringles has the potential for global expansion, especially promising in rapidly growing markets such as Brazil,” said Mogelonsky.“Manufacturers that are willing to devote resources to promoting the brand and driving innovation for Pringles can establish it as a cornerstone of their product portfolio,” added Koerten. 
The complexity of measuring the impact of food taxes on health and a call for a reduction in taxes on healthier food groups was raised at the recent plenary session of the EU Platform for Action on Diet, Physical Activity and Health.The Chair of the plenary session, Despina Spanou, in reporting the outcome of the 2 February meeting of the High Level Group on Nutrition and Physical Activity, said member states agreed pricing initiatives could not be sufficient on their own to counter obesity trends and urged the focus of future exchanges to be on the development monitoring tools to gauge impacts of such levies.Food and beverage taxes, which have garnered much attention of late, are currently not subject to specific harmonized EU legislative provisions. Platform member, the European Public Health Alliance (EPHA), claims the impact of fiscal measures applied to food policy can be significant when combined with health promotion measures designed to increase awareness of the health issues associated with a poor diet.Polish ‘back-track’ slammed In a recent open letter to the Polish government, the EPHA expressed its disappointment the ministries of health and agriculture and rural development ‘back-tracked” on a proposal to increase the current value added tax (VAT) there from 8 to 23% on a series of “unhealthy” products.The Polish parliament has “therefore missed the opportunity to have an impact on growing chronic diet-related diseases and obesity levels,” said the letter from the alliance. The EPHA is urging the Polish government to “reconsider its initiative and take it forward as the governments of Denmark, Hungary and recently France have done."And the alliance argues that, in times of austerity, food taxation offers goverments a two-pronged arrow to deal effectively with two pertinent issues -the obesity epidemic and the ongoing economic crisis - in one. Saturated fat benchmarking Meanwhile, Spanou also informed the Plenary that the Commission is working towards proposing an annex to the common framework for the reduction of selected nutrients to address saturated fat including possible reduction benchmarks for the next platform meeting in June. And, Angelika Mrohs, managing director of the German Federation for Food Law and Food Sciences, also updated the plenary on a joint government and food industry initiative in that country focused on how to reduced industrial trans fats in food. She said that a possible guideline of a maximum of 2% trans fats target definition may be agreed by stakeholders for some food products early this year.Re-educating consumersMeanwhile, Christina Drotz, Nestlé public affairs, told Platform members about the Swiss food group’s efforts to implement a stepwise reduction of the salt content of its ranges over several years, gradually “re-educating consumers’ taste buds.”And she informed the plenary that Nestlé is now removing trans fats in products from its recently acquired food businesses as well as its pledge to further cut sodium levels in its soups, recipe mixes and pizza lines by an average of 10% over the next three years.Drotz also outlined how the food giant is looking at introducing child appropriate Guideline Daily Amounts (GDA) on the labelling of products targeted at that segment. 
A newly discovered mechanism for the absorption of iron from vegetables and legumes could provide a solution to iron deficiency problems, say researchers.The "groundbreaking" study – published in The Journal of Nutrition – is reportedly the first to uncover the existence of at least two independent mechanisms for iron absorption from non-meat source – offering a potential new treatment for iron deficiency using the legume based ferritin. The discovery the alternative absorption mechanism using ferritin, by Dr Elizabeth Theil from the Children’s Hospital Oakland Research Institute (CHORI), USA, could provide the key to helping solve iron deficiency by providing an alternative, affordable, and readily available source of iron, said the researchers.Theil and colleagues demonstrated the alternative mechanism for the absorption of ferritin, a large, protein-coated iron mineral rich in legumes, in addition to the more well-known mechanism for iron absorption of small iron complexes like those found in iron supplements.“Our study shows that this different mechanism of iron absorption from plant ferritin is more efficient and gives the intestinal cells more control. It can be a new way to help solve global iron deficiency,” said Theil. Study detailsThe new study combines the results of two different experiments, one conducted in humans and the other using rats.In the rat model, portions of the rat intestines were bathed with solutions of traceable iron, either as a typical type of iron supplement or as ferritin. Theil explained that the teams measurements revealed that both the large ferritin and the smaller iron complex were absorbed through the intestine.In the human study, iron in ferritin was given to volunteers along with a non-meat iron dietary supplement, or with heme iron in meat – to investigate whether the different types of iron competed with ferritin iron for the same absorption mechanism.In each case, the iron competitor had no effect on the iron absorption from ferritin, noted the researchers.“What these studies show together is that during digestion, ferritin is not converted from its large, mineral complex, which contains a thousand iron atoms, to individual iron atoms like those found in many iron supplements,” explained Theil. “Instead, ferritin iron is absorbed in its protein-coated, iron mineral form by a different, independent mechanism; iron absorbed as ferritin, leaves the intestine more slowly, but may, provide greater safety to the intestines than iron supplements,” she added.  Theil said that in addition to potentially being safer, and causing less irritation to the intestines, the absorption of iron as ferritin is easier for the intestine.The authors said that further studies are needed to pinpoint the exact mechanism of ferritin absorption. However, they added that their results demonstrate that ferritin-rich foods – such as legumes – could provide a significant source of dietary iron for those in need of increasing iron. Source: The Journal of Nutrition Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.3945/​jn.111.145854 “Absorption of Iron from Ferritin Is Independent of Heme Iron and Ferrous Salts in Women and Rat Intestinal Segments”Authors: E.C. Theil, H. Chen, C. Miranda, H. Janser, B. Elsenhans, et al 
Cohen: 'Without the public demanding reduced-sodium products, and with their competitors’ products unchanged, industry has no incentive to be at the forefront of change.'If consumers are not demanding lower-sodium products, and the government does not mandate reductions, the food industry has “no incentive to be at the forefront of change”, according to one legal expert.Marsha N. Cohen is professor of law at the Hastings College of the Law, University of California, and a member of the Institute of Medicine (IOM) committee that produced the 2010 report ‘Strategies to Reduce Sodium Intake in the United States’.Voluntary change in the food industry cannot workIn a comment submitted to the Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) as part of its probe into sodium reduction approaches , professor Cohen said: “The work of the National Sodium Reduction Initiative (NSRI) is a good start, but my observation is that relying on voluntary change in the food industry cannot work. Government must become involved.” I cannot blame industry for backtracking on some sodium reduction workShe added: “It appears that some of the food companies that made changes in products several years ago – when NSRI was getting started and the IOM committee hard at work – have backtracked. “I cannot blame them for doing so; if their sodium-reduced products were not selling, and their competitors were not engaging in sodium reduction, what choice did they have but to abandon their public-spirited behavior?  “The lack of a level playing field for industry was a concern of the IOM committee, and it must be foremost in the mind of regulators. Without the public demanding reduced-sodium products, and with their competitors’ products unchanged, industry has no incentive to be at the forefront of change. We must change the ‘food universe’ around usShe concluded: “While I applaud those companies who have tried to engage in ‘stealth reductions’ and to add to their reduced-sodium lines of foods, I cannot see significant impact on this serious public health problem… until there are requirements that everyone in industry must meet.” While serving on the IOM committee, it became “quite clear to me that sodium reduction will have to happen in a stepwise fashion to get the support of the public as well as to modify our sodium taste”, claimed Cohen. And that meant sodium reduction across the board from food manufacturers and foodservice companies: “Success in reducing our sodium taste will require changing the food universe around us.  “Merely asking people to reduce their sodium intake cannot work: too many of us are too reliant on prepared and restaurant foods to have much impact just by changing our behavior in our own kitchens.” Campbell Soup: One size fits all approach doesn’t workHowever, most food manufacturers submitting comments to the docket said they favored a voluntary approach.Campbell Soup, which hit the headlines last year  by re-introducing some sodium to a line of soups that had been subject to significant cuts, said a one-size-fits-all approach did not work.For example, a sodium level of 480mg/serving for condensed tomato soup had been “well accepted by consumers and continues to be successful in the marketplace”, said the firm.However, reducing sodium to 480mg in another product was not accepted by consumers. “We also re-launched a mainstream product line as Select Harvest soups at a uniform sodium level of 480 mg per serving, without making the healthy sodium level part of our consumer messaging, i.e. maintaining the mainstream product positioning of the line. “This last move proved to be too aggressive and did not meet the expectations of consumers purchasing soups that are not explicitly positioned as ‘healthy’.‘Disappointing taste is not something people get used to, they simply make other choices.’It added: “Sales went down to the point where corrective steps were taken to improve taste, including adding back some salt and other recipe changes.”Ultimately, said the soup giant, a “one-size-fits-all approach does not work… Disappointing taste is not something people get used to, they simply make other choices.”Nestlé: Each food matrix is different, even within a product line In its comment to the docket, Nestlé Nutrition noted: “What we learned during our development is that each food matrix is different even within a product line. Extensive effort was required to reformulate to achieve taste acceptance, and to not increase fat or added sugars.  “Sodium chloride has other technological effects in the food matrices that go beyond saltiness. For example in food systems that are tomato based, salt effects the perceptions of sweetness and souriness. In cheese, sodium works differently as well, affecting texture and mouthfeel.” Because of this, sodium replacement was rarely a case of a “one for one substitution with potassium chloride or other salt substitutes, nor can you just reduce the amount of salt without rebalancing the other components in the food”, said the firm.Click here  to read comments submitted to the docket.  
The recent veto of 'percentage less' claims by MEPs is indicative of a lack of trust in the food industry, said the UK trade group, the Food and Drink Federation (FDF), which is intent on continuing to push for such amendments to the health claims regulation. MEPs, voting at plenary on 2 February, did not give their backing to the Commission’s bid to revise Annex of EC Regulation 1924/2006. The plenary vote followed the rejection of the European Commission’s proposal two days earlier by members of the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety (ENVI) committee. The amendments, if passed, would have allowed, for example, a ‘15% less sugar’ claim, which would be based on a previous formulation of the same product as well as a ‘no added salt’ claim. But some EU lawmakers saw this incremental reformulation bid by the industry, which had the backing of the member states, as just a marketing ploy and not one focused on the health of consumers.When asked how the food industry might rethink its approach to communication given this perception of it in some regulatory and consumer quarters, Barbara Gallani, FDF’s director of food safety and science, said food and beverage manufacturers “are doing everything possible” to demonstrate "our level of engagement with the health and wellness agenda". And, despite the negative ramifications of the veto for an industry in terms of communicating incremental changes in levels of salt, fat and sugar to the consumer, the director of food safety and science at the trade group, said that food and beverage manufacturers’ strategy of “step-wise” reformulation “will not change overnight.” “We remain committed to this method of developing healthier products,” stressed Gallani. “We will continue to look at ways of how to better inform consumers of our efforts within the legislative guidelines - perhaps taking a more pragmatic approach and giving direct examples of successful step-wise product reformulation,” said the FDF spokesperson, who cited the fact that products across a range of categories in UK supermarkets have managed a reduction of salt content of 60% to 70%. “But these salt cuts didn’t happen in one go - they were introduced over a period of 10 to 15 years - and enabled the industry to take the consumer along the reformulation-for-health journey with it while ensuring continued market acceptability of products with lower salt from savoury snacks to biscuits to bread,” said Gallani. The proposal has gone back to the health and consumer policy directorate at the Commission, which will have to redraft it, and initiate the approval process from member state backing to the ENVI committee stage once again. Gallani said the food industry advocates will press home their disappointment at the negative outcome of this month’s veto by MEPs in “all the forums” open to doing so, in a move to get the regulation pushed through again. When asked what kind of rewording might enable such a development she told FoodNavigator.com: “Honestly, at present, I don’t know. Obviously, no-one wants to waste anyone’s time on developing a proposal that would simply be vetoed again. But we want our pleas to be reconsidered - and we don’t believe the MEPs who voted against the amendments really took into account the ‘no added salt’ claim.” 
‘On-the-go’ food and drink consumption has increased significantly in recent years in Germany, finds new research from Nestlé.The Swiss food giant commissioned research into dietary habits in the German market - the ‘So is(s)t Deutschland’ survey, which it claims is the largest and most comprehensive examination of people’s consumption patterns ever conducted in that country.The study was carried out by the Allensbach Institute, the Society for Consumer Research (GfK), Ipsos Germany and the Icon Kids & Youth institute.Nestlé commissioned the first study in 2009 to analyse the impact of social changes on people’s dietary patterns, and authorized a second poll in 2011.The study, said the company, found that young people were the most likely to consume food and beverages ‘on-the-go’. “Around 41% of 14 to 29-year-olds in Germany visited fast-food restaurants at least once a month, compared to only 7% of 45 to 59-year-olds,” indicated the research.Findings reveal perceptions around kids’ diet.The poll also noted that 68% of participants, including two-thirds of parents with children under the age of 18, felt that too many children in the country had an unhealthy and unbalanced diet.More than 90% of non-professionals surveyed said they ate breakfast, lunch and dinner at home, while more than two thirds of professionals had lunch outside the home, with 27% of this category electing to eat out for breakfast usually or at least occasionally.Snacking trends Young single people and young couples without children, in the main, were the most likely to substitute main meals with snacks, concluded the study.The research showed this particular trend was especially prevalent among the under 30s.More than two thirds of people under 30 ate ‘every now and then’ instead of having a regular main meal, found the poll, with roughly one sixth of this group replacing a main meal with a snack every day or almost every day.Influence of working day The research, said Nestlé, demonstrated surprisingly that longer working hours affected women’s eating patterns more than men’s.The Swiss headquartered company added: “Overall, the study found a striking disparity between the sexes’ general attitude to food. More than 55% of women said they worry very much or too much about their diet, compared to 32% of men.”The research indicated that among the professional participants and those who worked a 40 to 49-hour week, 43% of women had irregular eating habits compared to 36% of men. “More than two thirds of women whose working week exceeded 50 hours ate irregularly, compared to just over half of men in the same category,” reported Nestlé. Unpredictable daily routines More than half of the 20-to 29-year-olds and more than two in five professionals who took part in the study said their daily routines were unpredictable.“Of this group, only one in five said they ate at fixed times of the day. 43% ate only when they had time and 31% said they ate whenever they were hungry,” found the research. 
Ben Bouckley is deputy online editor of BeverageDaily.comAnyone who has spent any appreciable amount of time working in the food industry realises that the issue of ‘junk food’ marketing to children is a hydra that rears two heads for every one cut off.It’s an emotive issue that gives headline writers a frisson of satisfaction, news served hot with a self-righteous splatter of indignation (like jam shot into a doughnut) especially when kids are at issue.But at the same time us food hounds and hacks feel a bit weary, dusting off our e-quills to report on an issue that (albeit important) has been done to death, moribund like that pizza you forgot in the oven.“A new report released by the Children’s Food Campaign (CFC) and the British Heart Foundation (BHF), reveals the manipulative tactics junk food manufacturers use to hook children while they play online and entice them to eat foods loaded with fat, salt and sugar.”The CFC raised the rhetorical stakes in outlining its ‘super complaint’  – sent to the UK Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) last week – against major beverage and food brands for ‘child marketing’.And although the charity made valid points regarding the need to tighten up online advertising loopholes that allow brands (whatever their protestations) to reach children, I believe the CFC rather lost its balance in the scramble to fix bayonets and tilt at industry ‘evils’.Big brand radio silenceMost beverage brands cited by the CFC whom we contacted last Thursday for comment sent sent back radio silence (54 food and beverage brands were mentioned in all), but one firm that did go on the record was Dairy Crest.A spokesman for the UK-based dairy processor told BeverageDaily.com that its successful milkshake brand Frijj was clearly targeted at young adults aged 16-24 years old, and that the firm was disappointed it had been included in the CFC’s report index.He added: “The term ‘junk food’ to describe Frijj demonstrates a misunderstanding of nutritional science and the FSA’s [UK Food Standards Agency’s] nutrient profiling (NP) model, from which this report is based. Significantly, the FSA never uses this term.”A palpable hit, since the FSA itself stressed in 2007: “The use of the term ‘junk food’ by the media and others to describe the foods that the NP model classifies as HFSS demonstrates a misunderstanding of nutritional science and how the NP model works.”We live in an advertising age, where if firms don’t move forward – also within the online marketing realm – then they fossilise, while rivals thrive. Personally speaking, I also think Dairy Crest has a fair point regarding its target demographic, and has a right to exploit the online space accordingly.I agree with the CFC that childhood obesity is a very real threat in developed nations. But why tar an entire industry with the ‘junk food’ brush? Moreover, no data on individual website complaints was released by the CFC: so how were industry players meant to respond – without risking being seen as evasive – when we contacted them for comment?Broader internet issueThe CFC made the point that access to many brand websites was uncontrolled (no age checks, connections with Facebook, etc.) but so is access to more harmful web-based content, which opens up a wider debate on problems regarding, for instance, cyber-bullying and access to pornography.Results of a survey of 1,800 UK adults released last week by pressure group Parent Port revealed that 25% allowed their children to play over-age games, and 40% let them watch over-age films.Perhaps the adults in question were chowing-down on the couch with a Frijj and a packet of Wotsits. But that’s not all the fault of food firms, rather it points to wider issue surrounding society and parenthood. And we can’t overlook what are undoubtedly some positive effects of television and internet access.In many cases food and beverage firms need to sharpen-up their act online, but they don’t deserve unfair stigmatization from the CFC, both as regards the ‘junk food’ tag, and the ‘one-size-fits-all’ super complaint launched last week, although the tactics behind that were clear.Fuzzy/fizzy logicSpeaking to this publication last week, CFC spokesman Malcolm Clark said: “Studies have shown that kids up to the age of 12, possibly more, are less able to tell the difference between information and advertising.”Where to draw the line? Returning to the Frijj/Wotsits example, even adults are sucked in by the subconscious allure of advertising, or at least convince themselves after the event that a given purchase was ‘rational’, inventing valid reasons for it.Perhaps we adults also need protection, bombarded as we are by a 24/7 advertising blitz? Personally I don’t think so. Businesses make money by advertising their wares and encouraging consumption – it makes the world at least as happy as it is sad.A classic dilemma for the Marxist who believes that the fruits of production should be distributed according to ‘need’ is how we define that term? And who is the Marxist to tell me I don’t ‘need’ this fizzy drink? Out of such fuzzy logic a fizzy and general drinks industry was born.In sum, with food and beverage business success key to economic recovery, it’s important not to smother it in its cradle. It’s also vital that those worried by child marketing weigh their words carefully, however strong an argument there is for the ASA to beef-up its s.15 online marketing clause, which the CFC claims the 54 firms in question breached:‘Marketing communications must not condone or encourage poor nutritional habits or an unhealthy lifestyle in children.' 
Industrial by-products from tomato processing contain a significant amount of bioactive compounds that could be used to provide natural and sustainable source of antioxidants for functional food formulation, or to act as preservative ingredients in foods, say researchers.The study – published in LWT - Food Science and Technology  – compared the concentration of bioactive compounds in tomato processing by-products and unprocessed tomatoes. The research team found that on a dry weight basis, tomato by-products and wastes contained significantly lower amounts of lycopene, but had increased levels of beta-carotene, tocopherols, sterols and terpenes – while fatty acid profile were found to be similar in both processed wastes and unprocessed tomatoes. “The results obtained indicate that industrial tomato by-products contain significant amounts of bioactive phytochemicals, which seem to be able to withstand industrial processing methods ... Most of these phytochemicals –tocopherols, polyphenols, carotenoids, some terpenes and sterols- are known to exert antioxidant activities,” explained the researchers, led by Nick Kalogeropoulos from Harokopio University, Greece.“As tomato wastes are bioorganic materials and being in line with the trend for sustainability and recycling/reusing, these value adding constituents could be either isolated from the wastes to be used as natural antioxidants for the formulation of functional foods, or to serve as additives in food systems to elongate their shelf life,” they said.Tomato processing  Kalogeropoulos and his team noted that the tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum L.) is the second most important vegetable crop worldwide (behind the potato), “with annual production at 100 million tons fresh fruit produced in 144 countries.”  As such, processing is accompanied by the generation of a large amount of wastes, which are made up of bioorganic substances such as seeds, pulp and skins.“Owed to rapidly expanding global demand on manufacturing processes and final products exerting minimal or no environmental risks, tomato processing wastes have been the subject of significant research during the last years aiming especially to the recovery of lycopene and β-carotene by several extraction schemes,” explained the research team. In the new study, the team investigated the presence of health promoting phytochemicals – like carotenoids, polyphenols, sterols, terpenes and tocopherols – in tomato processing byproducts, “in order to evaluate the potential for their use as additives for the preparation of functional foods,” or for the use as a preservative ingredient in foods.   Study details The team compared the contents of several bioactive phytochemicals, including sterols, tocopherols, carotenes, terpenes, total and simple polyphenols, in addition to measuring the radical scavenging capacity and reducing power of unprocessed tomatoes and processed tomato by-products.Kalogeropoulos and his colleagues revealed that tomato by-products contained a similar amount of total polyphenols, and exhibited similar DPPH radical scavenging activity and ferric reducing power to unprocessed tomatoes.“Among 18 simple polyphenols ...hydroxycinnamic acids predominated in whole tomatoes, while flavonoids predominated in tomato wastes with naringenin comprising 87% of flavonoids,” said the researchers.They argued that since most of the phytochemicals determined in the by-products exert antioxidant activities, and have been previously suggested to have beneficial effects on human health, the tomato by-products “could be successfully utilised as functional ingredient for the formulation of antioxidant rich functional foods.”  Source: LWT - Food Science and Technology  Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1016/j.lwt.2011.12.036 “Bioactive phytochemicals in industrial tomatoes and their processing byproducts” Authors: N. Kalogeropoulos, A. Chiou, V. Pyriochou, A. Peristeraki, V.T. Karathanos 
The European Commission has approved the bid by German company Saria Bio-Industries for joint control over Dutch group Teeuwissen Holding and Spanish company, Jagero II.Saria, part of the privately-owned Rethmann Group, recycles and manages animal, vegetable and agricultural by-products for human and animal consumption.Teeuwissen, based in the Netherlands, and Jagero II, a Spanish holding company, are both active in the commercialisation of meat and the purchase and processing of abattoir by-products (ABPs) for use in the production of casings for sausages and other products. 
The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) has published population reference intakes (PRIs) for protein, the latest stage of its work on dietary reference values (DRVs), with a particular focus on levels needed during pregnancy and childhood.A PRI indicates the amount of an individual nutrient that the majority of people in a population need for good health depending on their age and sex.“The population reference intake for adults of all ages was estimated to be 0.83g protein/kg body weight per day and is applicable both to high quality protein and to protein in mixed diets,” said the Parma-based assessor.In delivering an opinion on EU protein intakes, EFSA’s Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA) also acknowledged that intakes twice the 0.83 level were, “regularly consumed from mixed diets by some physically active and healthy adults in Europe”.The NDA said such levels “are considered safe”.“Data from food consumption surveys show that actual mean protein intakes of adults in Europe are at, or more often above, the PRI of 0.83g/kg body weight per day,” the NDA wrote.DRVs deniedBut less positively for industry, the panel said dietary reference values (DRVs) could not be established for several health conditions due to insufficient data.“The available data on the effects of an additional dietary protein intake beyond the PRI on muscle mass and function, on body weight control and obesity (risk) in children and adults, and on insulin sensitivity and glucose homeostasis do not provide evidence that can be considered as a criterion for determining DRVs for protein,” it said.“Likewise, the available evidence does not permit the conclusion that an additional protein intake might affect bone mineral density and could be used as a criterion for the setting of DRVs for protein.” In this way it added that DRVs could not be set for amino acids because they “are not provided as individual nutrients but in the form of protein.”“In addition, the Panel notes that more data are needed to obtain sufficiently precise values for indispensable amino acid requirement.”Demographic breakdownThe panel recommended PRIs for population groups such as pregnant women who should consume 1, 9 and 28g of protein per day in the first, second and third trimesters of pregnancy respectively.Lactating women should consume 19g/d for the first six months and 13g/d afterwards.Children should also increase intake above the PRI depending on their age.Data from dietary surveys show that the average protein intakes in European countries vary between 67-114g/d in adult men and 59-102g/d in women – between 12-20% of total energy intake for both sexes. The NDA said accurate European protein intake data per/kg was scarce but varied between 0.8 to 1.25g/kg for adults.EFSA has raised a number of positive points about protein, not least the possibility that the PRV should be increased for pregnant and lactating women, claims Suzane Leser, nutrition manager, Volac Lifestyle Ingredients. She told NutraIngredients.com that Volac also welcomes the spotlight shone on the Nitrogen Conversion Factor (NCF) – an ongoing debate for the dairy industry and food labelling.  Labelling misalignment?Leser said that on reading the Opinion we see a potential misalignment between EFSA recommendations and the new Food Information Regulation (FIR). "The EFSA opinion states that when the aim is to indicate a product’s potential to supply amino acids, the use of the NCF specific to the food is more relevant. For dairy products this is x 6.38 as established in Directive 92/46/EEC for the sale of milk and milk products. However, to aid the simplicity of the labelling process the new Food Information Regulation states that a standard conversion rate should be used for all protein sources: x 6.25. This means that protein levels based on N x 6.25 typically underestimate the true protein contribution from high quality protein sources and, most critically, significantly overestimate the contribution from protein sources of low quality." She argues it is not just a consumer labelling issue but potentially one of resource efficiency. "In line with the above Directive, dairy products are commonly traded with protein NCF x 6.38. Assuming all customers declare protein in compliance with labelling regulations as N x 6.25, there must be unnecessary over-supply. This is uneconomical because protein is the most costly of the food elements to consumers, and from a sustainability perspective hardly in line with the European Sustainable Consumption and Production Policies."The EFSA opinion can be found here. 
A cooler jalapeno flavour for salsas, sauces and dips by TreattDemand for increased taste, odour and aroma without the heat has driven the development of a savoury jalapeno flavour application that can be used in sauces, dips and beverages.Global flavour supplier, Treatt, has broadened its pepper flavour range with its latest product Jalapeno Treattarome 9816 in response to consumer demand for increased variety, adding to the green bell, roasted and habanero pepper distillates.Dr John Boddington, director of technical services at Treatt’s UK base, said that “it is the absence of the heat components that makes this product unique.”“People like the taste of jalapeno but can’t get the full flavour due to the heat…Formulators want more flavour and aroma and they want this intense taste without the bite,” Boddington told FoodNavigator.com.In light of this, Treatt has developed a product without the natural heat of jalapeno peppers, he said, “we don’t capture the heat elements, we purposely leave them out.”A short, rapid production process is ensured by using specialised technology where jalapeno peppers are grinded in a low temperature, high vacuum distillation process and the flavour and aroma components are extracted.The company noted that the resulting distillate is full-flavoured and milder in nature.Manufacturers can then choose to add heat accordingly and thus ensures a reliable degree of heat in the resulting taste in products, added Boddington.Cooler jalapeno salsas and dipsYou are left with a surprising taste, Boddington said, with fruitier and sweeter notes than a regular jalapeno.Depending on the dosage, flavour impact is altered with a lower dose of 0.01% holding fresh, green pepper undertones and a higher dose of 0.01% giving a strong, green and earthy flavour with paprika notes.The jalapeno pepper derivative is clean-label and 100% natural and miscible with water, alcohol and propylene glycerol.On the European market, the target applications are salsas and dips ideal for formulators who want a mild yet full-flavoured jalapeno, Boddington said.He noted that in the Far East markets, the product would be ideal for vegetable waters and tomato-based drinks that are extremely popular with consumers.The latest product falls within the company’s Treattarome range of clear, aqueous distillates which are derived ‘from the named food’ (FTNF) which was developed to meet the growing consumer demand for natural. 
International Flavors and Fragrances (IFF) saw net profits slump 56% in the fourth quarter due to one-off costs and ongoing high raw material prices, but adjusted results were largely in line with analysts’ expectations.Net profit fell to $24.3m in the quarter ended December 31, compared to $55.5m for the prior year period, while revenue grew 2% to $644m compared with $629m a year ago.Revenue in the company’s flavors segment grew 8% to $322.7m, driven by double-digit growth in emerging markets, as well as continued interest in health and wellness initiatives in North America and Western Europe, the company said. The beverage category saw the strongest growth, with sales increasing by double digits.“At the beginning of 2011, we expressed optimism that IFF would continue to perform well despite ongoing macroeconomic challenges and unprecedented raw material cost increases,” said IFF chairman and CEO Doug Tough. “Our ability to achieve our long-term financial targets for the second consecutive year demonstrates the team’s aptitude for successfully executing our strategy and navigating through a challenging operating environment.”Earnings per share were $0.30, compared to $0.68 in the fourth quarter of 2010, although on an adjusted basis, they were up 7% to $0.74. Per-share earnings were hit by restructuring costs and a patent litigation settlement.For the full year, revenue was up 6% to $2.8bn.Financial analysis firm Morningstar said: “We have emphasized that IFF is not immune to impending headwinds, like commodity cost inflation and soft consumer spending, and the company's fourth-quarter results support our view. Nevertheless, we believe our long-term thesis that barriers to entry for new participants run deep in the global flavors and fragrance industry remains intact, and we expect IFF will be able to earn excess returns on invested capital for many years to come.”Tough added: “We continued to leverage our geographic reach to capture the growth potential of the emerging markets, to strengthen our innovation platform to deliver differentiating products, and to maximize our portfolio to improve the underperforming areas of our business.”Meanwhile, the company’s results were impacted by its fragrances sector, which saw revenue contract 3% to $321m in the quarter, due to lower sales in developed markets, particularly Germany, France and Spain. 
Russia announced on Tuesday that it had banned cheese imports from Ukraine’s three largest cheese producers due to the presence of vegetable oils, but one processor has hit back at the ban, while reports suggest the move could reflect higher political stakes.The ban extends to three Ukrainian processing plants: the Pyriatyn cheese factory (owned by Milk Alliance Holding), as well as rival plants in Hadiachsyr and Prometei.Russia’s consumer rights protection service, Rospotrebnadzor, said the ban had been imposed to ensure food security, and to guard against counterfeit products entering the nation’s market.On January 24, the service published a list of Ukrainian firms that it said had provided false information on the composition of cheeses supplied to the Russian market, in violation of consumer rights regarding accurate product information.Cheese falls foul of regulationsAfter tests on 14 samples, the Russian agency said that the Ukrainian cheeses had failed to meet requirements under Russia’s ‘Technical Regulations for Milk and Dairy Products’, specifically in regard to the presence of vegetable oils and notification thereof on product labels.Given that 85% of Ukrainian cheese exports are sent to Russia – exports totaled 55,000 tonnes in the last 10 months alone – the dispute could prove to be a major headache for native producers.Milk Alliance Holding (logo pictured) suspended production yesterday at Pyriatyn on account of the ban, and said in a statement that it did not understand it, especially since its plant had been checked on many occasions by Ukrainian and Russian officials. The company said its products met all relevant Russian requirements, and that it did not even possess the equipment necessary to add vegetable oils to cheese.Rospotrebnadzor said yesterday that its chief Gennady Onishchenko had held talks with the Ukrainian agrarian policy and food minister Mykola Prysiazhniuk aimed at resolving the crisis.Sides locked in discussionsIn a statement, the agency said that both parties recognised the need for “joint and concerted action” to bring cheese products into compliance with Russian rules and resume supplies.A “sanitary-epidemiological" examination of the enterprises in question would need to be conducted, the service said, as would reviews on the status and availability of laboratories conducting quality control and safety checks on products exported to Russia.But UKRINFORM, the National News Agency of Ukraine, raised the stakes yesterday, citing experts who it said suggested the cheese ban was a Russian tactic to entice Ukraine into its Customs Union (Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan), and also reflected tensions relating to gas transportation.Maria Kolesnyk, an analyst from AAA consulting reportedly told the news agency that the cheese dispute was entirely political in character, and that Russia had not provided any evidence of Ukrainian violations. 
Global food prices have jumped nearly 2% marking the first increase since July 2011, claims the price index from the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).However, this level is still 7% lower than in January last year. Prices of all the commodity groups in the index registered gains last month. Oils increased the most, followed closely by cereals, sugar, dairy products and meat.Weather worries Prices mostly reflected worries about weather conditions affecting 2012 crops in several major producing regions, with key growing regions in South America and Europe hit. “There is no single narrative behind the food price rebound – different factors are at play in each of the commodity groups,” said senior grains economist Abdolreza Abbassian, who notes a lack of involvement in the price hike of the usual suspects - the dollar and oil.“But the increase, despite an expected record harvest and an improved stocks situation, and after six months of falling or stable prices, highlights the unpredictability prevailing in global food markets,” he added. International prices of all major cereals with the exception of rice rose, with maize gaining most, 6%. Wheat prices also gained, though less significantly. Higher palm and soy oil demand Firming import demand for palm and soy oils, combined with a seasonal decline in palm oil production were the main driving forces behind the increase in fats and oil prices. The meat price index averaged 179 points, 0.5% (1 point) above its December value - prices of the various meat types followed mixed directions, with pig meat up 2.8% on expectations of strong imports by China and poultry down by 1%. The dairy price index averaged 207 points in January 2012, up 2.5% from December. Meanwhile, the sugar price index rose to 334 points in January, up 2.3% from December, but was still 20% lower than in January last year, with the jump said to be largely driven by less than favourable weather conditions in Brazil, the world’s largest producer and exporter. 
An innovative new technology platform could provide manufacturers and food formulators with greater control and speed when producing encapsulated ingredients such as flavours and bioactive ingredients, say its developers.The new technology – a single-step method for producing ‘smart’ microcapsules using fluid droplets – is said to have potential commercial applications in food, nutrition, and pharmaceuticals, among others.  Developed by researchers at the University of Cambridge, UK, and published in prestigious academic journal Science , the team behind the new technology promises that the ‘one-step’ microcapsules offer several advantages over currently used techniques.Speaking with FoodNavigator.com, Dr Oren Scherman from the department of chemistry at Cambridge explained that the fluid technology used by the new platforms means that microcapsules have little variation in terms of size, and are “highly reproducible and scalable.” “I think that the fundamental advance that we have taken is the ability to both formulate the capsule and encapsulate cargo in a single step, so all the molecules and components are dynamically assembled simultaneously,” said Scherman, who was one of several researchers from the University of Cambridge involved in the platform’s development.“We have on demand capability for release, and you can also have whatever you want as far as capsule size, or cargo, all in a uniform structure,” he said, noting that he was sure that there was “a lot of opportunity within the food manufacturing and production domain.”  “Because it’s a platform technology, it has a lot of applicability to many diverse areas, and I think that is something we are keen to explore through contact current leaders in the field,” added the expert.New technology Scherman explained that the platform the technology uses manipulates incoming streams of water and oils emulsions: “You have three fluid aqueous based streams coming together, and when they hit a non-aqueous stream at the 90 degree angle it sheers off little droplets.” By controlling the ratios of the different streams and the ratios of the inlets, you can gain very uniform droplet sizes, he said.Using this process Scherman told this publication that not only are all the capsules the same size and structure, but also, that the same amount and concentration of the ‘cargo’ ends up in each capsule – allowing users to make “quantitative loading of cargo , on demand,”The Cambridge chemistry expert added that the properties of the capsules themselves – in terms of stability and release profiles – would largely depend on the end user applications, noting: “If you want something on a time release then that’s something that is easy to obtain, or perhaps if you want a stimuli-response release then that’s also easy to select,” he said.“If you want to build in an Achilles heel in which the capsules are not robust or are sensitive to certain conditions then that is absolutely possible, but on the other hand if you want to build steadfast and robust material then you can,” he confirmed.Total control of microencapsulation (mp3)ApplicationsThe research team said the technology could have a multitude of uses, with Scherman adding that there was “lots of opportunity” in the food and nutrition industries: “We can use this for flavours, scents, active ingredients, live cultures – all with potential for different release mechanisms if they are needed,” he expanded.Encapsulation applications (mp3)Scherman also said the technology platform is immediately scalable, noting that although for the study the team produced microcapsules at the rate of around 300 second, “the micro-fluidic platform really allows you to tune this rate of formation from tens per second to thousands or tens of thousands per second – maybe even more.” “So the scalability here is something that is quite impressive,” he confirmed. He added that another ‘great thing’ about the microcapsules produced in this way is that they can be dehydrated and the later rehydrated without affecting the chemistry of the capsule: “You can dry them down and the rehydrate them ... which allows you to have tremendous applications when you think about transport of cargo.”  Source: Science Volume 355, doi: 10.1126/science.121541 “One-Step Fabrication of Supramolecular Microcapsules from Microfluidic Droplets," Authors: J. Zhang; R.J. Coulston; S.T. Jones; J. Geng; O.A. Scherman; C. Abell 
Dutch firm Smilde Bakery has announced it is in negotiations with French company Hafner to take over the French operations of its Délices du Palais business.The strategic alliance is expected to give Smilde a route into Asia.Delices de Palais is currently owned by Hafner. The company produces a wide range of bakery products including choux, éclairs, tartlets, biscuit sheets and frozen cakes.Smilde hopes to upscale production for the French side of its Délices du Palais business by partnering with Hafner.Under the deal, Hafner would take control of French operations while Smilde would manage Délices du Palais plants in the Netherlands.Any deal will mark the first time the two companies have teamed up.Consolidated French marketMaiko van der Meer, general manager for Smilde told BakeryAndSnacks.com: “They [Hafner] were the ideal partners to serve the French business”He said the two companies had similar product portfolios, which completed each other and did not raise competition concerns.According to van der Meer, the French market was consolidating and companies would need to be big in order to be successful. If the deal goes through, Hafner are expected to take control of Délices du Palais’ two factories in Renaison and Septeuil. Meanwhile, Smilde will continue to operate its two Délices du Palais factories in the Netherlands.Van der Meer said production at the French sites could be optimised with Hafner on board and would enable the Délices du Palais business to enter global markets.Route to AsiaHe said that Hafner had global distribution networks that Smilde currently doesn’t have at its disposal.Hafner, he said, were present in Asia and the Middle-East, which could also allow Smilde’s traditional Dutch products to enter new markets.Asked when the deal was expected to conclude, van der Meer said that discussions were on-going. 
In the second installment of the new FoodNavigator series - Monthly Career Insider - we talk to the VP of dairy innovation at Chr. Hansen.Title: Vice President, Innovation Dairy, Chr. HansenName: Anne SkriverAge: 47Job description? I’m heading up Chr. Hansen’s dairy activities, where we develop cultures and enzymes for a global market and apply them in milk products. We are also supporting sales and customers all over the world with our technical expertise. In my area, we are around 65 people divided into five departments, dealing mainly with cheese and fermented milk. Four departments are located in Denmark and one in France – which allows me to travel and give me an insight into another working culture. What do you actually do?I see my own job split into three different activities. The first is related to competences. I need to make sure that we have the right skills in my area to meet customers' expectations and also to support future projects in the organisation. It is very important to me that our technical competences are world class – in practice it is a lot about working with partners and universities and also developing people into experts/specialists.The second part is to drive and secure the resources of our dairy innovation pipeline. This work I do is in close collaboration with my department managers, our marketing department and our project managers.The third part is technical support to customers. I need to ensure it is both of high quality and that we meet the assigned deadlines.How did you get in?Actually, I started at Chr. Hansen in the summer of 1989 as a student to help with the dish washing, etc. in the lab. Afterwards I did my master’s degree in collaboration with Chr. Hansen and when I graduated, I was offered a job with the company working with genetic characterisation of strains. During this work it became clear to me that I wanted to undertake a PhD, which I did at Copenhagen University. During my PhD I worked with texture and rheology of dairy products – a subject that I still follow closely and which has my deepest interest. Consequently, I was also hired again in 1995 by Chr. Hansen to develop and implement texture methods of dairy products. Since 1995 my career progression has been rapid: Chemist in an analytical lab, section manager for sensory and texture analysis, head of a fermented milk department and, since 2007, VP for Dairy Innovation. Best bits about your job?The absolute best aspects of my job relate to seeing things progress - whether it is team members who are growing and developing themselves or being part of a group that has succeeded with a new product or a process.I’m very people oriented and I love to talk to people- both my own employees and my colleagues all over the world. But I especially enjoy visiting customers – this is where I see why we are doing what we are doing and get and understanding of their problems. After a customer visit I’m usually extra energised.Worst bits?Overall I’m very very happy with what I do. Nevertheless, I’m not a detail person and too many details, especially on the administrative parts, can drain all my energy. On the other hand, I am learning how to overcome this and it is working quit well. Another area is working alone – I don’t appreciate that. But this is not a real problem as it happens quite seldom.What skills do you use most?In the past I mostly used my technical skills – I do that less and less now. But a technical background in my current role helps a lot. I mostly use my managerial and communication skills. In an innovation organisation it is also necessary to think out of the box and to have the ability to “look through” all the noise and analyse what is the most important part. Finally, I think my passion for what I’m doing is a skill that is constantly used and creates a lot of value.Career highlight so far?I have several personal highlights in my career, where my learning curve has been extremely steep. But I think what I am most proud of is what I (together with a lot of other people) have built up in the area of texture in fermented milk.What’s your advice for someone wanting to work in production and technical?First of all, a technical education will make your life much easier in these kind of organisations. Furthermore, it is extremely important to be open-minded in what you do. Try as many things as possible to broaden your horizons.It is important to find out what you are passionate about – not only the specialist area you want to work in, but also the process and way of working. Knowing yourself and your passion will make your working life much more fun with passion an asset for any organisation.   
Ten years ago the Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition (GAIN) was established to fight rampant malnutrition in the developing world via micronutrient fortification programmes. But for a long time, it struggled to effect change in the face of logistical, financial and educational challenges.Now, with an ever-growing network of international private and public partners on board, the agency says it is better placed to affect nutrition interventions that can change lives, “in about 25 countries”.“GAIN is an international development agency that has a vision of a world without malnutrition,” said GAIN’s Nigerian country manager, Larry Umanna, after yesterday’s Feeding the World conference in Geneva.“We work with various stakeholders on the ground to fortify staple foods such as flour, vegetable oil and sugar with the appropriate micronutrients.”Umanna said knowledge gains were helping his agency battle a problem that affects more than 1 in 6 of the Earth’s population with bio-fortified foods.“In the last five years everybody has been talking about the agri-nutrition interface but nothing much has been done,” he said. “In the last one year there has been a renewed enthusiasm towards looking at the linkage between agriculture and nutrition. How do we get agricultural practitioners to apply a nutrition lens on their agricultural programmes?” 
Nestlé says its 'Imagination Station' on Facebook is targeted at parentsNestlé has leapt to the defence of its Nesquik milk-based drinks brand, after the Children’s Food Campaign (CFC) lodged a ‘super complaint’ with the UK Advertising Standards Authority (ASA), complaining that well-known beverage and food brands were targeting children with 'cynical junk food marketing' practices online.A list sent to this publication details 54 websites that the CFC has taken issue with, which includes big brands such as Nesquik (Nestlé) Vimto (Nicholls) Coca Cola, Pepsi, and Dairy Crest-owned brand Frijj.Major food brands on the list include Cadbury, Mars, Sugar Puffs, Pringles, Penguin and Maltesers; all the brands and websites cited featured in the CFC’s 2011 report (with the British Heart Foundation), The 21st Century Gingerbread House.“Offending” company websites all promote products ‘high in sugars or fat or salt’, according to the CFC, and encourages poor nutritional habits via a positive presentation of junk foods that influences children’s food choices and preferences.A Nestlé spokesman told BeverageDaily.com this morning that the firm had strict policies regarding marketing and advertising to children across all media.He said: “We do not advertise or market any products directly to children under six. We would only market products to under-12s that meet a strict nutritional profile that helps children achieve a healthy balanced diet and have limits for sugar, salt and fat content.”Dairy Crest disappointment at Frijj inclusionMoreover, the spokesman said the Nesquik site gave parents product and nutritional information and recipes, while it’s ‘Imagination Station’ on Facebook was “clearly intended for parents” looking for activities and playtime ideas to enjoy with children, and competitions were also aimed at parents.A Coca-Cola GB spokeswoman said the firm was aware of the CFC’s complaint, but since that body had not shared further details it would await further information from the ASA. “We are committed to responsible marketing, and do not target any of our marketing to under 12s,” she said.A Dairy Crest spokesman said: "Although we support campaigns that encourage children to have a healthy, balanced diet and plenty of exercise, we are disappointed that Frijj is included in the index of this report as its digital marketing clearly focuses on its main consumer group - young adults aged between 16 and 24.  "Frijj is made with fresh milk (a blend of 76% skimmed milk and 18% whole milk) it is rich in calcium, contains less than 1% fat and has no artificial colours or flavourings."The term ‘junk food’ to describe FRijj demonstrates a misunderstanding of nutritional science and the FSA's nutrient profiling model, from which this report is based. Significantly the FSA never uses this term."The CFC is complaining about the sites under the terms of s.15 of the ASA Committee of Advertising Practice Code (CAP), where it claims they breach this clause: ‘Marketing communications must not condone or encourage poor nutritional habits or an unhealthy lifestyle in children’.CFC spokesman Malcolm Clark told BeverageDaily.com that his organisation felt impelled to make a super complaint, after UK minister for Culture, Communications and Creative Industries, ED Vaizey, encouraged the body to file a complaint, if it felt ASA rules had been broken.Clark said Vaizey believed that industry self-regulation was enough, and that the CFC planned to put this to the test, where the super complaint compiled numerous specific complaints on the issue.He said: “What we’re saying is ‘let’s just see how strict the rules are. There are 54 complaints, and we’re interested to see how the ASA looks at them. Ed Vaizey says the rules are strict and he has faith in them, but we want to test this out.Clark agreed that s.15 was open to interpretation as to whether firms were breaking ASA rules: “It doesn’t specify what ‘condone’ or ‘encourage’ mean, and we’d like to see a strict definition of these words.”Cross-media consistencyConsistency across media, and applying tougher television (OFCOM) standards to the internet and all other channels would help children, parents and create a level playing field for food and beverage companies that did implement good online practice, he said.We asked Clark whether the issue was really that serious, given that companies had always advertised to sell products, and children and teenagers were themselves keen consumers?“Children are keen consumers, but they’re made keen consumers by the environment around them, the pressures of marketing. Studies have shown that kids up to the age of 12, possibly more, are less able to tell the difference between information and advertising,” he said.“There is a childhood obesity epidemic, and we want to make things easier for both children and parents to make the right dietary choices – that’s not helped by an online environment where foods high in salt, fat and sugar are constantly promoted to them.”Challenged as to whether children visited the sites in question in great numbers, given the popularity of Facebook, television and other entertainment media, Clark said: “We don’t have stats on individual site usage.“But last year we found that 90% of children live in a house with internet access, and over 40% of 12-15 have smartphones. Clever cross-promotions also link company sites to Facebook pages, where there are also embedded games.”What the CFC wanted was consistency, Clark said, where it supported beefing-up the marketing restrictions within the ASA code accordingly. “These are products that can’t be advertised on TV to children, are more appealing to children. Some sites have good practice, proper checks to ensure you are 16-17 years-old, but not enough sites do this, and firms that do are at a competitive disadvantage.”Of the other drinks brands websites censured by the CFC, Vimto (Nichols plc) and Britvic (Robinsons Fruit Squash) separately declined to comment on the CFC complaint, while GlaxoSmithKline (Lucozade, Ribena) and PepsiCo had not responded to requests for comment at the time of writing. 
In a competitive sucralose market, Tate & Lyle should price the sweetener keenly to ensure significant market share in the future, claims an analyst as the group releases ‘reassuringly dull’ Q3 results today.Martin Deboo, from Investec, told FoodNavigator.com that Tate though, in the main, tied into sucralose contracts with customers signed a few years back, should be careful not to set prices too high for the sweetener and thus open up the market to competitors - as had occurred previously, he notes, in the aspartame sector.The sweetener was one of the hot topics on the agenda today during the conference call on food ingredient group Tate’s third quarter results, with the group saying sucralose volumes grew but below the particularly strong levels seen in the first half.CEO Javed Ahmed reported a solid performance for the whole group in the quarter, which ended 31 December 2011. He noted growth in the sucralose market but added that “despite press reports it is difficult to pinpoint any definite new global capacity. Our focus going forward is to ensure we don’t lose any contracts to competitors.”Share performance hit But Deboo said the cautious approach taken by Tate management regarding their expectations for the group’s FY12 has undermined the share performance. Nevertheless, the analyst said the interim management statement was in line with market expectations.“The moving parts seem to be pretty much as we anticipated and Tate remains on a steady course. But we sense some caution from management relative to our expectation that there was room for FY12/FY13 consensus upgrades. So with the shares strong into the event, plus what we see as a demanding valuation, we anticipate a broadly neutral market reaction this morning,” said Deboo.Rising sweetener margins in EUThe broker added that Tate, as expected, reported rising margins in liquid sweeteners in Europe - isoglucose and others - with these following the price of sugar upwards. However, corn prices are reported as higher though Deboo said that Investec thought they were lower in Q3 on a spot basis, so “the profit upside here might not be as good as we thought.”  He added that the weaker ethanol margins in the US would also curb growth.“In line with our expectations and ADM's Q2 commentary, Tate report that margins in US ethanol contracted in December on the back of the removal of the 45c/gal blender tax credit. This will impact Tate's profits in Q4 FY12 and in FY13 if margins don't improve.  However Tate point out to us that, relative to our estimate of c100m gallons of annual ethanol production, they have the potential to lower their capacity down to a minimum level of 40 - 50m gallons to limit their exposure to these lower margins,” said Deboo.Commodity price hedging 'limited'CEO Ahmed mentioned various initiatives to offset commodity volatility such as cannibalizing bulk ingredients volume, and in Europe, the group said it continues to contract over shorter periods to mitigate corn cost volatility. Tate also reported that it had enhanced sweetener margins against a backdrop of higher sugar prices. But the Investec analyst remained unconvinced about the ability of suppliers like Tate to really hedge against raw material volatility, particularly in relation to corn prices, which he said would be ‘limited.” Indeed, the CEO said as much, claiming that its hedging had only really served to dampen Tate’s exposure to commodity price hikes. Natural sweetener success Ahmed also reported encouraging reception for its new monk fruit-derived Pure Fruit sweetener with beverage and dairy sectors the initial focus for applications.“This is not about replacing sucralose, high fructose corn syrup or sugar,” cautioned the CEO in relation to a question from an analyst on it being a substitute for those sweeteners. “Pure Fruit will be competing in the natural space,” said the CEO, who added that it would be premium product. “It is not about pricing the ingredient though. It is about pricing the solution,” said Ahmed, who explained that cost related to food or beverage category, the application and the level of technical expertise required in formulating thus with Pure Fruit. 
How to tackle obesity and hunger remains a two-pronged challenge for the agri-food industry, but increasing crop yield is not the answer - instead the focus should be on boosting the nutritional value of crops, claims a sustainable food systems activist. Speaking to this publication at the Feeding the World conference in Geneva this week, Ellen Gustafson, the founder and executive director of the 30Project, argues that GM foods are not necessarily the way forward either as they are also based on high commodity and high yield crops. The activist reckons that intensive agri-systems and the creation of new and cheap processed have led to our current global landscape of 1 billion hungry and 1 billion overweight.“We have to look at the system and capitalism in a new light and migrate away from an approach that only ever boils down to improving yields,” said Gustafson.And while fortification of foods may work in the short term, growers, she argues, should be targeting the development of crops high in a range of nutrients instead.Gustafson predicts that disruptive technologies that can link growers directly to the urban consumer may more readily enable a global food system that provides healthy, affordable food for people whether in Europe, the US, Asia or Latin America. The 30 Project aims to bring together key organizations and activists working around the world on addressing hunger, obesity, and agriculture issues to talk about their visions for the food system and the next 30-years. “Many of the best anti-hunger and anti-obesity organizations have been so focused on their important work that they have not been able to work together on common challenges,” say the activists. 
An Irish researcher whose team has developed novel technology to brew cost-effective, tasty low alcohol beer says he believes such products have a genuine market, as a major European brewer awaits the results of further work.Dr. John Morrissey from University College Cork (UCC) told BeverageDaily.com that was unable to name the brewer for reasons of confidentiality, but that his team’s research – now at proof of concept stage – that could see tastier, low alcohol ale and lager hit retail shelves within three to five years.Historically, some low alcohol beers had an “insipid” taste due to ingredient dilution, Morrissey said, while others had alcohol removed after brewing, a costly process that also risked harming product flavour.Research outlineOutlining his research with Rob Karreman and other UCC colleagues, Morrissey said: “What we want to do is take the same starting ingredients, follow the same process, and end up with a product that has less ethanol, but everything else is the same."He added: “The hypothesis of the project was that when we look at different yeasts, some are capable of fermenting sugars and making a lot of ethanol, whereas others that are broadly very similar don’t make ethanol.“That is due to differences in the metabolism of closely related yeasts. We have genome sequences of these yeasts, so were able to look at all the genes involved in metabolism and run a computer algorithm to identify what steps – given that yeasts have the same genes – make them function differently."Looking at gene sequences allowed the team to discover which genes were responsible for difference in metabolism, Morrissey said. “We identified some genes that appeared important to us, and we then swapped genes from non-producing yeast into producing yeast."The idea is that if we could just affect that aspect of the yeast metabolism, then they would then take sugars in, process it through the normal pathway. But rather than converting all that sugar into ethanol, some of it wouldn’t go into ethanol, but just go into normal cellular growth."This method avoided past problems with this type of strategy, Morrissey said, where you unbalanced the metabolism, where this can lead to “undesirable off flavours developing”.Niche market potential?Morrissey said the team had engineered a viable laboratory strain of ale yeast to make beer, but since the proof of concept strain was genetically engineered, Morrissey said, it was not viable for production on a commercial level. “But demonstrating how we can modify the metabolism to get this different end result, it’s possible to identify the step in the yeast that can be modified. There are other non-GM ways of doing that," he said.The team needed to recreate the effect in a commercial brewing strain, he added, and then to “engineer out the GM part of it”, which he was confident could be done.As for the potential of low alcohol beer, Morrissey said: “A big brewer would be unlikely to risk their brand with production en masse of beers like this, and it would perhaps be more of a niche market, and probably looking at something like a bottled beer market – then seeing how it develops.“I think there’s a genuine market for it from talking to people in the brewing industry, as there is societal pressure and political pressure influencing them, I think. “Here in Ireland the pubs are quite conservative – with five or six beers on drafts – but the beers that are being bought in the off-trade are much more diverse now. “My sense, at least, is that people are looking for different kinds of beers, and growth in the market here seems to be tied to micro-brewed and craft beers, English ales.” 
AarhusKarlshamn (AAK) has posted modest growth in its fourth quarter (Q4) and final year results driven by raw material price increases and strong performance in its core food ingredients segment.The company saw record profits for value added products in its food ingredients arm during the quarter.Improved volumes also positively impacted sales.Results roundupQ4 net sales were up 14% on last year to €509m (SEK 4.4bn) due to increased raw material prices and a better product mix. This led to increased full-year net sales of €1.9bn (SEK 16.6bn).Operating profit for the quarter improved 10% to €30m (SEK 265m) thanks to record figures in the food ingredients segment. For the full year, this translated to €103m (SEK 911m) in profit, up 11%The food ingredients arm of the company boosted its profits by 14% during the quarter, largely due to volume increases of 5%The company’s chocolate and confectionery fats business also saw growth. However, AAK’s technical products and feeds arm suffered in a challenging market that the firm said would not let up in the next two quarters.Volumes upAAK said that its volumes had increased 2% during the quarter, partly due to the impact of its Golden Foods/Golden Brands acquisition in July last year.Volumes for the food ingredients business increased from 222,000 MT to 234,000 MT, accounting for the lion share of total company volumes. InvestmentsAAK spent €10.3m (SEK 91m) during the quarter to expand its US production capacity and to carry out routine maintenance. It also reduced its workforce by around 40 employees as it streamlined activities in Scandinavia and the UK.The company’s UK operations are being restructured to focus upon speciality products as profits had been hit by declining commodity volumes.AAK CEO and president Arne Frank said the company remained “prudently optimistic for the future mainly driven by the Food Ingredients business”. 
Tata Global Beverages has announced that it plans to market a nutrient beverage in India in a joint venture with PepsiCo, as both firms seek to profit from rising ready drink sales in the country.NourishCo Beverages is a joint venture (JV) between the two multinationals that will begin selling Tata Water Plus nutrient water in the Tamil Nadu, a southern Indian state, Tata said in a statement today. Ashok Namboodiri, head of sales and marketing at NourishCo Beverages, said: “There is a growing trend towards health and wellness in the beverages category,” said “We believe there is immense potential, which will evolve over a period of time.” 
Encapsulating vanillin into a nanoweb could help to boost the flavour compound’s shelf life and stability to high temperatures, say researchers.The study – published in Food Chemistry  – reports that complexes of the vanilla flavour compound with cyclodextrin can be made more stable to high temperatures and provide longer shelf lives if they are electrospun into nanofibres. The researchers from Bilkent University, Turkey, produced the “cost-effective” functional nanowebs, containing vanillin-cyclodextrin complexes, using a polyvinyl alcohol nanofibre matrix.“Encapsulation of vanillin-cyclodextrin inclusion complex in polyvinyl alcohol nanofibre matrix yielded vanillin with enhanced durability and high temperature stability,” said the research team, led by Dr Tamer Uyar of Bilkent.“Our results should be of interest to food, biomedical, textile and personal care industries, since cyclodextrin inclusion complex functionalised nanowebs may have practical applications depending on the type the functional components used – such as flavours, antimicrobials, antioxidants, drugs, and bioactive agents,” reported the researchers.VanillinVanillin is widely used as a flavour and fragrance and it is also used as a food preservative due to its antioxidant properties in food industry. However, the research group noted that vanillin has a short shelf-life – because of its volatile nature. “Therefore, the stabilization of vanillin is very important for its prolonged functionality,” they argued. Uyar and his colleagues noted that cyclodextrin inclusion complexes are “widely used in the food industry in order to achieve prolonged shelf-life and high temperature stability for volatile or unstable flavours and other food additives.”They added that such inclusion complexes provide stabilization and protection to the guest molecules from evaporation, degradation and oxidation.NanowebsThe authors explained that electrospinning has recently received attention as a potential technique for use in foods – since it offers a versatile and cost-effective technique for producing nanofibres and nanowebs that allow large surface-to-volume ratios. “Electrospinning of nanofibres has also received some interest in functional food and active food packaging, since electrospun nanofibrous matrix having exceptionally high surface area and high encapsulation efficiency, can be effective for the stabilization of active food additives,” they added. The new research successfully incorporated vanillin-cyclodextrin inclusion complexes into an electrospun nanoweb. Study highlightsThe researchers reported that the vanillin-cycoldextrin complexes were prepared with three type of cycoldextrin (CD) – alpha-CD, beta-CD and gamma-CD – to find out the most favourable CD type for the stabilization of vanillin. They said the PVA-vanillin-CD nanofibres were successfully electrospun from aqueous mixture of PVA and vanillin-CD, and were found to prolonged shelf-life and offer high temperature stability.“Our results indicated that vanillin with enhanced durability and high temperature stability was achieved for PVA-vanillin-CD nanowebs due to complexation of vanillin with CD, whereas the PVA nanofibres without CD could not effectively preserve the vanillin,” explained Uyar and his team.Additionally, they noted that the nanoweb containing gamma-CD was the most effective for the stabilization and slow release of vanillin – “suggesting that the strength of interaction between vanillin and the gamma-CD cavity is stronger when compared to alpha-CD and beta-CD.” Source: Food Chemistry Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2012.01.040 “Encapsulation of vanillin/cyclodextrin inclusion complex in electrospun polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) nanowebs: Prolonged shelf-life and high temperature stability of vanillin”Authors: F. Kayaci, T. Uyar 
Cargill pumps €20m into two chocolate and cocoa facilities in BerlinCargill has announced plans to invest €20m in two cocoa and chocolate production facilities in Germany as it looks to boost its presence domestically and in Eastern Europe.The cash will be used to boost product lines at Cargill’s sites in Lichtenrade and Reinickendorf in Berlin, which it acquired following its takeover of Schwartauer Werke Kakao Verarbeitung Berlin (KVB) in May last yearThe move is expected to increase production capacity and help Cargill capitalise on strong customer demand in Eastern Europe.Increased scopeCargill currently has cocoa and chocolate facilities in Western Europe, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Brazil, Canada and the USA. The company said the current investment would expand its market reach further.Jos De Loor, managing director for Cargill Cocoa & Chocolate told ConfectioneryNews.com: “These upgrades will strengthen our ability to serve the needs of our customers and cater to our customers’ growth particularly in Germany and Eastern Europe”“By upgrading, expanding and integrating these two production sites into our wider cocoa and chocolate network, we are better placed to serve our customers and seamlessly provide them with the best quality product from the most appropriate site,” he continued.Capacity boostWhen KVB owned the facilities in May last year, its two plants had a capacity of over 75,000 tonnes of chocolate per year and employed around 180 people.Once upgraded, the two chocolate facilities will produce products in the bakery, confectionery and ice-cream categories with chocolate, cocoa powder, cocoa liquor and cocoa butter.Asked by how much this would boost volumes, DeLoor said: "We will increase theoretical capacity of liquor and chocolate production to cater for the growth our customers expect."He added that a chunk of the money would be invested in food safety to improve quality and consistency of the company’s product offering.Work will begin on the Reinickendorf site this spring.German chocolate Germany, Europe’s largest chocolate market, seems to be proving fertile ground for chocolate producers.In April last year, Cargill’s competitor ADM Cocoa opened a new technical centre in the country where its customers could experiment with flavour, mouthfeel and shelf-life of their chocolate-containing products. 
The chocolate and cocoa industry has backed an EU resolution to tackle child labour in cocoa production and warns children may still have produced cocoa that is 100% certified.The European Parliament’s Trade Committee recently adopted a resolution and recommendations aimed at eradicating child labour in cocoa plantations in Africa.Isabelle Adam, general secretary of the European Cocoa Association (ECA), told ConfectioneryNews.com that cocoa child labour was complex and could not be resolved by the EU alone.She added that there were no guarantees that chocolate products that used 100% certified cocoa were free from child labour.Development issue“It’s not easy to affect change rapidly. There are no quick fix solutions.” she said.The ECA, along with the Association of chocolate, biscuit and confectionery (CAOBISCO), the Federation of Cocoa Commerce (FCC) and the World Cocoa Foundation (WCF) wants to see “a holistic and coordinated framework” to affect change.Asked what this meant, Adam said: “The EU cannot alone change the way the agricultural sector works.” “If all the stakeholders involved play their part, from industry, to civil society, to governments (both in the consuming countries and the producing countries), we can effect sustainable change.”She added that education was key because there was a low rate of literacy among farmers who tended to encourage their children to help on farms.“You have to respect this tradition,” she said.Does child labour benefit confectioners?Asked whether stamping out child labour could negatively impact cocoa production and lead to price hikes hitting confectioner’s profits, Adam said: “There is absolutely no economic interest for us in having children involved.”Similarly, Sabine Nafziger, secretary general of CAOBISCO told this site: “There is no direct link between prices of products to the final consumer and the achievements towards the eradication of child labour.”Certification is no guaranteeAdam said that less than 35% of the world’s cocoa supply was certified.She feared that if the EU allowed only 100% certified cocoa to be traded it would harm the incomes of thousands of farmers in Africa , lead to shortages and impact developing countries that rely on cocoa farming.She added that it was not a given that 100% certified cocoa was not produced by a child because farms were not audited on a daily basis.Fairtrade Foundation also says that it cannot provide guarantees, but would take immediate action following a breach.“For the time being there is not a 100% guarantee. That’s why we need to be working on the root causes," said Adam.According to the ECA head, poverty seems to be at the heart of the issue. 
Waste from pineapple processing could provide a range of value added ingredients for the food industry, including a new source of the enzyme bromelain, say researchers.The study – published in the journal Food and Bioproducts Processing  – reports that waste products from pineapple processing, including the peel and stem of plants, could provide a valuable source of expensive bromelain extract. Bromelain is an enzyme that is usually extracted from the stems or juice of pineapples. It has been used commercially in the food industry, dietary supplements, and the cosmetics industry – where it is known for meat tenderising, brewing, baking, and for the production of protein hydrolysates, among other things.“Because of this very wide range of applications, commercial bromelain is very expensive costing up to 2400 USD/kg. The objectives of this study were to extract bromelain from the pineapple wastes ... to investigate some biochemical characteristics of the extracts,” said the research team, led by Dr Saroat Rawdkuen of Mae Fah Luang University, Thailand. Rawdkuen and his team found waste portions including the peel, core, stem and crown, contained high levels of the valuable enzyme. They reported that peel gave the highest yield of the enzyme (providing up to 40% by weight) whilst the crown provided enzymes with the highest protease activity.Study detailsThe Thai research group isolated and characterised bromelain extracts from the wastes from fruits grown in Chiang Rai province (Nang Laeand Phu Lae pineapple cultivars).Waste portions provided a significant yield of the enzyme with peel supplying between 29 and 40% by weight. Core, stem and crown waste products were found to yield 9–10%, 2–5% and 2–4% respectively.Rawdkuen and his colleagues concluded that with increasing pineapple production – and thus proportionally increasing wastes – the process of bromelain extraction from such waste could provide “much added value.”They added that the use of wastes in such a way would not only provide added revenue through increased bromelain supply, but would also reduce the impact of waste disposal – which “represents a growing problem since it is usually prone to microbial spoilage and it causes serious environmental problems.”  Source: Food and Bioproducts Processing Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1016/j.fbp.2011.12.006 “Pineapple wastes: A potential source for bromelain extraction”Authors: S. Ketnawa, P. Chaiwut, S. Rawdkuen 
Finnish dairy processor Valio has revealed that Swedish milk imports hit the profitability of its 'basic milks unit' in 2011, but the firm has hailed the success of recent additions to its branded product portfolio, which include 'digestion yogurt', soft quark and fermented milks.Asked why Swedish milk was affecting Valio's basic milk volumes so much - imports have cut the co-operative's volumes by almost 25% in the past two years - a spokeswoman told DairyReporter.com the slump was due to "competitors' strategy and low sales prices".Valio said in an earnings release that its basic milk market share in Southern Finland (the most competitive market) was around 35%.Nonetheless basic milks account for only 8% of Valio's net sales - €1.822bn in 2010 - and the spokeswoman pointed to the success of its branded products such as Valio OLO yogurt and Valio Plus milk and sour milk lines: the former in Finland and Sweden and the latter in Finland.Valio also said its profitability improved in Russia during 2011, and the spokeswoman said this was not due to more favourable exchange rates alone."We have also managed to improve the product mix there into more added value direction. That is for instance to sell more fresh products and added value cheese," she said. 
A conference held today in Brussels will examine the issue of saturated fat in dairy products, where scientists and legislators will discuss how public health policies fit with the latest science, and EDA president Dr Joop Kleibeuker told DairyReporter.com the event would challenge negative perceptions of saturated fat in dairy products.Organised by the European Dairy Association (EDA), the conference will examine the health effects of fatty acids in dairy and whether saturated fat in products has a negative health impact.Due to take place this afternoon, the conference will also examine what role public policy should play in advising EU consumers.Speakers at the event include Professor Arne Astrup from the University of Copenhagen (on whether we should change our current paradigm on saturated fat based on new science), and Professor Givens from the University of Reading – presenting science on the value of dairy for health.High-profile panel discussionMEP Esther de Lange will also discuss how to align policies directed at the health of EU consumers with the latest scientific developments. The above speakers will be joined in a panel discussion by Stephanie Bodenbach from DG Sanco (the body responsible for implementing EU laws on food safety, consumer rights and health protection).Professor André Huyghebaert from the University of Ghent and Laurent Damians from the European Milk Forum (EMF), a member organisation seeking to maintain and develop EU milk and dairy consumption, will also feature on the panel.EDA secretary general, Joop Kleibeuker, told DairyReporter.com: “The reason we organised the conference now is that we see that there is a change in the acceptance and understanding of the role of saturated fats in relation to, for example, cardiovascular and heart health."There is quite some evidence that saturated fats are not all the same. Secondly, there is strong evidence when you look at food as a whole, for example cheese. You see that even when cheese contains significant levels of saturated fat, people consuming cheese do not have more problems with cardiovascular disease."Saturated fat to blame?A recent workshop chaired by Prof. Astrup in Denmark brought together leading experts in the field who concluded, in Kleibeuker's words, "that there was no evidence that saturated fats really are the source of the problem"; he said this workshop and other publications prompted the EDA to organise today's conference.Kleibeuker said: "You won't change perceptions with a single session, but we hope that this can contribute to this. We want to accelerate discussions, the exchange of knowledge, and change perceptions. "Because there is a lot going on at the moment -- we've had the food information regulation, we have had the claims, we will have the nutrient profile discussions again."He added: "There are many discussion on reformulation, and in many of these saturated fat plays a role. And we want to make sure that they play the right role, with the right science behind the policy developments that we will see in coming months and years."Asked if he believed that studies such as a one (published last year) based on the Oslo Health Study, which suggested an inverse correlation between full-fat cheese consumption and metabolic syndrome, were encouraging, and whether now was an good time to hold such a conference, a spokesman for trade body Dairy UK (which is attending today’s event) told DairyReporter.com:“Absolutely. We need to make sure that government and policymakers are making decisions on the basis of the latest science. It’s vitally important.”Current UK National Health Service (NHS) guidelines stress that fat in milk provides calories for young children, for instance, but states that “much of the fat in milk and dairy foods is saturated fat”, and advises lower-fat milk and dairy foods as “healthier choices”. 
Dairy processing giant Arla has revealed to DairyReporter.com that it has overhauled its research strategy for 2012, to prioritise product innovation and tailor its portfolio to specific world markets.Paul Cornillon, senior vice president R&D, at Arla’s Strategic Innovation Centre in Denmark said the company had sharpened its research focus, and in some respects had moved beyond its ‘Research Adds Value: Research Strategy 2012’ .Referring to this document, Cornillon said: “We haven’t moved 180 degrees away from it, but we’re moving out a bit in some areas, because we really want to focus what we want to do there.“One of the reasons for the change was that Arla wanted to bring innovation to the top of the agenda. The company has focused a lot on efficiency and manufacturing footprint, to lower costs, that type of thing,” he added.“Obviously, when you want to extend a company such as Arla to other geographies, this is not enough. We all know it. You need to bring more products to market, have more and more novelties that you can show to the consumer.”Global dairy tastes differCornillon added that Arla was keen to ensure that its products – researchers in Denmark and Sweden focus on yogurts, fermented milks, milk-based soups and sauces, cheeses, butters and spreads – suited different consumer groups globally: one example he gave was the Middle East. “Arla is a very northern European/UK-based operating company that extends to The Netherlands, Russia, Germany and China. But it’s still a Nordic company somehow,” he said.But Cornillon said that Arla decided last year to prioritise ‘innovation’, and to this extent had grouped NPD people together with marketing personnel in ‘global category teams’. He said: “We bought all the NPD people with marketing, so we could have the whole pipeline fully aligned between NPD staff, and the marketing people who work with consumers. So we align a concept, develop a nice product and packaging that fits the concept and what consumers wanted.”Cornillon said he started work at Arla in mid-October (in the past he worked for Tate & Lyle and Danone), and has since refocused its research around five axes, as he explained. Firstly, with regard to ‘Sustainability’, research priorities were now aligned with the firm’s ‘Closer to Nature’ ambition.“We’re going to have major research programs around packaging, around how do we operate in manufacturing facilities, and what can we do to help manufacturing facilities have lower impact on our environment,” Cornillon said.Arla's second new focus was ‘(New) Food Forms’, Cornillon said, with the company intent on designing products and concepts to meet the “conscious and unconscious” needs of consumers worldwide. “We’re going to see what we can do from a formulation standpoint to bring products and concepts to consumers wherever they are,” he said.Harnessing 'milk power'Cornillon added that Arla would work more closely with suppliers (of both ingredients and equipment), encouraging them to help lay the groundwork for new product developing, thus allowing the dairy firm to work faster and use resources more efficiently.“Then when we bring the products into the pipeline, our NPD people can take over to fine-tune recipes, flavours. Say if the product was for France, we would target it to the French taste, etc."‘Manufacturing Efficiency’ was the third research axis, Cornillon explained – focused on operations, capacity and cost improvements – while ‘Milk Power’ was a notable fourth pillar. He said: “It’s about looking at milk nutrition. Being able to communicate the goodness of milk to consumers, extracting the right nutrients from milk, and processing these in such a way that we can give them to consumers through our food forms.”Citing a direct link between milk chemistry research and nutrition benefits, Cornillon said Arla may want to make some functional claims regarding in “some products in some countries”, and communicate this to consumers.Arla’s fifth new research axis related to ‘Microbiology’, as Cornillon explained: “A lot of our products are based on strains and cultures such as cheese and yogurt. We will look at how can we own the microbiology of our products, to develop products specific to Arla.”Summing up Arla’s new research blueprint, Cornillon said: “Everything that is outside these five areas, we will not do. So it’s really helping us to focus our R&D spend.” 
Kerry Group is set to continue to reap the benefits from health and wellness trends, and, in particular, can continue to leverage the industry’s ongoing salt, fat and sugar reformulation efforts, claims an analyst.The Ireland-headquartered company is set to report on its full year results for 2011 on 21 February.Despite predicting a tough year for the Irish firm due to weak consumer demand in the UK and Ireland retail sector, Darren Greenfield, a broker with Irish investment house, NCB Stockbrokers, said ingredients and flavours will deliver for Kerry arising out of strong growth in the Americas and Asia-Pacific. The food industry specialist, in a note this week, also reckons that current euro currency weakness will benefit Kerry. “We estimate that a 5% weakening in the Euro could boost earnings by around 3%,” said Greenfield.And the NCB broker stressed that he expects currency tailwinds, acquisitions and emerging market growth to enable Kerry to deliver mid-to-high single digit earnings per share (EPS) growth in the coming financial year.For 2011, the analysts are expecting €5.3bn of revenues, and €490m in earnings before interest, taxes and amortization (EBITA). Furthermore, assuming no further acquisitions were completed in Q4, NCB’s predictions for year-end net debt for Kerry is €1.15bn, said Greenfield.But the market specialist said that with over "€1bn headroom we expect Kerry to continue its current ingredients and flavours acquisition strategy in 2012."Ready meals sector challenges Meanwhile, Kerry confirmed this week that 337 jobs could be cut at a UK factory as a result of increasing competition and tumbling sales in the ready meals market. The firm said that it had begun a 90-day consultation with staff at its Europarc plant in Grimsby but stressed that unless a solution was found to end falling sales, production at the site will be stopped. Kerry blamed increased competition in the market, which has resulted in reduced sales across most of the business’ major accounts. Frank Hayes, director of corporate affairs at Kerry Group, told sister site FoodManufacture.co.uk: “We have commissioned a review of the frozen ready meals business. We have made every effort to reduce the cost base and add additional business but regrettably we have not been able to restore profitability to the plant. “Our plan is to conduct a review of the site. If we cannot identify measures to secure production we will have no option but to end production.” Production at the site, according to Hayes,would be transferred to Kerry’s factory in Monaghan, Ireland. 
Picture Copyright: Premium IngredientsSpanish-based ingredients specialist Premium Ingredients is set to launch a new range of ingredients at Gulfood 2012 in Dubai, one of which is a novel concept that allows for the production of pasteurised fresh cheese without whey separation.Premilac XLK-11021 and Premigum XLK-11022 is a solution recommended for use in pasteurised fresh cheese produced by fermentation without whey separation; cream cheese produced with this blend can be developed with cream alone, without the need for milk.Discussing this ingredient combination, Ralf Neuendorf, Premium Ingredients’ marketing and business development manager told DairyReporter.com: “The combination of these two ingredients enables use of a different manufacturing process for producing fresh cheese without compromising on texture and quality.Significant cost savingsThe new production process meant significant cost savings, Neuendorf said, since customers were able to use less milk and eliminate the issue of whey disposal: He said: “The biggest challenge was meeting customer requirements in terms of texture and flavour using a different production process. Furthermore, our target was to offer a very flexible concept enabling easy adjustments to the texture.”“This concept is extending our current product offering for processed cheese products, and confirming our position as a global leader for functional solutions for processed cheese and pizza cheese.”Discussing Premium’s performance more broadly, Neuendorf said the main driver for product development in cheese and pizza solutions was cost reduction.“Quality comes as secondary, and some consumers in some regions are prepared to lower the quality of products if it comes with a significant cost saving.”Premium Ingredients saw itself as a global leader in processed cheese and pizza cheese, Neuendorf added. “Our solutions fit very well with customer requirements and keep us busy developing new business. However, we are not standing still, and are already developing solutions for the problems and challenges of tomorrow,” he said.Other innovationsOther new innovations to the company’s range at Gulfood include Premitex XLK-11054 for producing cheese triangle portions, Premilac XLK-11001 and Premigum XLK-8003, which used together can (according to Premium) produce a cheese spread with a high fat content without cheese.The blend also provided flavour to the finished product and provided a creamy texture without gelling, the company said.Finally, Premitex XLK-10016, is marketed as a “complete stabilizer solution” for individually wrapped sliced cheese, and Premium said it provided end products with a “long and firm texture with a low protein content of minimum 12.5%”. 
Israel-based supplier Frutarom has acquired Brazilian flavour house Mylner for $15.7m (€11.84m), underlining its strategy of plugging any gaps in its flavour portfolio or market base.The takeover represents the company’s third since the beginning of 2012. Mylner develops, manufactures and markets flavor focused mainly on sweet flavours for beverages and baked goods, and natural flavor products with a focus on the malt business.Speaking to Food Navigator.com this morning, Frutarom’s president and CEO, Ori Yehudai, said that the company’s Brazilian presence, prior to this acquisition, was in the area of ingredients only and, as such, Frutarom has not been able to leverage the considerable growth in demand for flavours within that market. “All our recent acquisitions have strengthened our positions in key areas, with our move on flavour company Etol in Slovenia in January this year aimed at boosting Frutarom’s presence in markets such as Slovakia, Croatia and Slovenia where we are not so strong.”The CEO added that the deal with UK company, Savoury Flavours, signed a few weeks ago, gives Frutarom access to the savoury segment within that market, which, added Yehudai, has massive growth potential. Consumer demandFrutarom reports that Mylner’s sales turnover increased by 43% over the last 4 years and that the sweet flavour specialist saw a revenue hike from US$ 6.8m in 2007 to US$11.4m in 2011. “Over the last year, Mylner’s sales turnover grew by 8%,” added the Israeli company.“We believe that the sales in the emerging markets in which Mylner acts will continue to grow at high rates over the next few years as a result of the shift to processed foods and beverages and from changes in consumer demands in this region,” said the Israeli flavour producer.Market penetration Asked why the company sought to access the Brazilian market through the acquisition front, Yehudai points out that it is down to a question of timing. “If you want to penetrate a new market through other means, it is feasible, but can take years. Purchasing a long established player like Mylner gives us immediate access to domestic food manufacturers and allows us to growth market share rapidly,” added the CEO. Yehudai explained that Mylner has extensive expertise in flavour technology and can adapt some of Frutarom’s existing flavour portfolio for use in the Brazilian market.The CEO said further acquisitions within both Brazil and Mexico are planned. Asian growth Accessing the China savoury flavours market is a slightly more onerous challenge though and growth through acquisitions can prove difficult considering the number of regulatory hurdles in place there. The CEO said that Frutarom is looking to build a savoury flavours production facility near Shanghai to accelerate growth in that market, with construction to start mid-2012 but completion would not be expected for at least 18 months following the initial turf-turning. “It took us a few years to acquire the land, which we finally secured at the back end of 2011,” said Yehudai. Commodity costs Asked about ongoing volatility in raw material prices, the CEO said that Frutarom will continue to adapt its selling prices to offset recent record hikes in some commodities and will aim to be as “competitive as possible” to manage further volatility while not hurting its margins. “We expect to see some relief in certain raw material prices in 2012,” added Yehudai.  
Dairy manufacturers are the target of a new colour range from Israeli supplier LycoRed with red, yellow and orange shades derived from lycopene and natural beta-carotene that promise stability even in fortified yoghurt drinks. The colours are suitable for dairy products with coloured fruit-based layers or stripes, whereby the colour of the fruit preparation base remains stable and does not bleed colour into the white dairy phase, said the company.But the line can also be used in a range of dairy products from yoghurts, smoothies, desserts, hard cheeses and ice-cream, added the producer.Roee Nir, colour and flavour global commercial manager at LycoRed, told this publication that a trial of the new range with a dairy multinational showed that it proved non-migratory in a two-tone strawberry and banana dessert targeted at children. He stressed that stability during processing and throughout shelf life is one of the main issues the food industry faces when using natural colours. Formulation challenges can arise in this regard around stability to pH, light, temperature and oxidative degradation, and also through interactions with other ingredients. Nir said that the Israel-headquartered group has managed to overcome these challenges with the natural carotenoid-derived hues, which, he added, are produced from a process that is also compliant with kosher and halal law. Fortified dairy usage And he said that LycoRed’s research around microencapsulation had also meant that the firm could test the new colours in a multi-vitamin and mineral yoghurt drink application, with no stability issues arising during the test phase.The company stressed that as there is no adverse reaction to Vitamin C, the red colour is ideal for red fruit preparations. Nir said that while the red and orange colours in the range are produced in liquid format, ideal for dairy applications, the yellow colour is only available in a powder format but that supplying a liquid version of this hue is a “priority project for the R&D team given that most manufacturers prefer to use the liquid format.”Pricing is at a level that can compete with what is available on the market in terms of other supplier’s natural colour portfolios, said Nir, but he added that the LycoRed line is “definitely brining something new to the industry in terms of non-migration attributes." 
Below normal levels of vitamin D, due to low sun exposure, have been associated with increased incidence of food allergy and eczema in children, say researchers.The study – published in Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology – reports that increased exposure to sunlight could reduce the risk of both food allergies and eczema in children. The researchers, led by Dr Nick Osborne from the European Centre for Environment & Human Health, at the Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry, UK, with several Australian institutions, found that children living in areas with lower levels of sunlight, and thus with low vitamin D status, are at greater risk of developing food allergies for egg and peanuts and the skin condition eczema, compared to those in areas with higher levels.Speaking with NutraIngredients, Dr Osborne explained that the data used in the new research comes from two separate studies in Australia – a particularly good place for this type of study as it spans nearly 3000 miles from North to South – in both four-to-five year-olds and in eight-to-nine year-olds. “To our surprise we found that allergy incidence changed from the Northern states that are closer to the equator where there was a low rate of incidence, and as we moved down towards the middle and then Southern states we found incidence was higher,” explained Osborne.As well as finding a link between latitude and allergies to peanut and egg, the results showed that on average children in the South of the country are twice as likely to develop eczema as those in the North, he said. Osborne noted that such findings build on existing evidence that suggests vitamin D status may play a role in rising levels of food allergy and eczema. Study detailsThe research team used the Australian study data to analyse how rates of food allergy, eczema and asthma varied throughout the country. Osborne added that the study was the first to utilise population data from a large scale epidemiological study to investigate such an association. “We found that a latitude gradient existed for both food allergy (peanut and egg allergy) and eczema, but not for asthma, in both age groups assessed,” wrote the researchers.They added that in the eight-to-nine year-old cohort, the odds of having a peanut allergy were six times greater in Southernmost regions when compared to the Northernmost areas, whilst the odds of having eczema doubled. “Similar to asthma, we found no latitudinal gradient for cow’s milk, wheat, and combined other food allergies,” they said.Osborne said he believes these findings provide us with an important insight into the prevalence of food allergies and eczema, which appear to be on the increase. However he cautioned that – as with many areas of vitamin D research – further research is needed before policies that advocate supplementation could be given credence."Its an interesting area of research, but there are still quite a few unknowns out there," said Osborne.“Vitamin D supplement may be appropriate for some people, but on the flip side getting out into the great outdoors also has great benefits,” he added." Source: Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology  Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2012.01.037 “Prevalence of eczema and food allergy is associated with latitude in Australia”Authors: N.J. Osborne, O.C. Ukoumunne, M. Wake, K.J. Allen,  
The Commission has move to clear up any confusion related to aspects of the new food labeling regulation for small and medium sized food companies in the EU.Regulation 1169/2011 (FIR), directly applicable in all member states, was published in the EU’s Official Journal in November last year and came into force the following month. The new rules replace the Food Labelling Directive 2000/13/EC and Directive 90/496/EEC on nutrition labelling. But transitional arrangements mean that most requirements do not apply until 2014 and nutrition labelling will become mandatory in 2016.But a lot of uncertainty remains in relation to how to interpret the new legislation.Brussels-based advocates for the small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) in the food manufacturing sector - the UEAPME Food Forum - sought clarification on a number of sections of the FIR, following repeated queries from its member associations. The Forum aims to monitor developments in EU food legislation so as to ensure that the regulations affecting SMEs are fair and feasible.Vitamin and mineral declaration In relation to Article 32 (3) and (4) of FIR, the UEAPME said some of its members said these could be interpreted as meaning that the declaration of the percentage of reference intakes for vitamins and minerals are voluntary but the content per 100g/100ml is the mandatory declaration, while others read them to mean that % RDA is mandatory alongside the per 100g/ml figure.The Commission responded that the legislation is the same as under the previous directive - Article 6(5)(a) of Directive 90/496/EC.“Regulation 1169/2011 requires through Article 32(2) that the information should be provided on the basis of 100g or 100ml and Article 32(3) requires that, in the cases where vitamins or minerals are declared, the information on the percentage of the reference intakes on the basis of 100g or 100ml also be given.” But the Commission stressed that the declaration of the reference intakes in relation to energy, fat, saturates, carbohydrate, sugars, protein and salt, under FIR, is voluntary.Allergen labellingIndeed, Lorraine Eve, head of regulatory affairs at specification and labelling services provider, Ashbury Labelling, speaking at a Brussels conference on regulatory issues in December last year said food manufacturers should await industry wide agreement on contentious areas of FIR such as allergen declarations before investing in major labelling redesign. “There is a lot of confusion within the industry as to how to interpret the new legislation, with questions over the allergen declarations in particular,” said Eve. “While understanding that there must be a clear reference to allergens in the ingredients list, there is uncertainty as to how allergens should be emphasised in that list in terms of font, style or background colour,” she told Food Navigator.com at the time.“Furthermore,” notes Eve, “brand owners would like to keep the ‘contains milk, nuts, wheat, etc.’ box on the food labelling but, again, there is a lack of clarity within FIR as to whether such voluntary information declarations are possible.”Industry-wide consultation “Food and drink industry trade groups and EU level representatives need to consult on implementing such aspects of the FIR and, as such, brand owners should carefully assess the impact of the new rules before starting on any major label redesigns in the intervening time," added Eve.The regulatory expert also reported the concern from the food manufacturing audience at the Brussels event in relation to introduction of the minimum font size requirement, noting the major cost impact this would have for the food industry, especially for multi-language labels. 
Calls for increased taxation and tighter regulation of sugar, to bring it into line with alcohol and cigarettes, have been branded ineffective, flawed, and naive, by academic experts and industry in Europe. The commentary in leading scientific journal Nature  discusses the global burden of chronic disease related to sugar consumption, and suggests the need to regulate certain dietary items. The authors of the commentary draw particular parallels between the health effects of sugar and that of alcohol and tobacco – arguing that ‘toxic’ sugar should be regulated in a similar manner.Led by Professor Robert Lustig from the University of California, San Francisco, the commentators advocate introducing a tax on processed foods with added sugar, limiting sales during school hours and placing age limits on purchase. In addition, Lustig comments that sugar is more dangerous to health than saturated fat and salt – which the commentary refers to as dietary “bogeymen”. They wrote: “Evolutionarily, sugar was available to our ancestors as fruit for only a few months a year (at harvest time), or as honey, which was guarded by bees. But in recent years, sugar has been added to nearly all processed foods, limiting consumer choice. Nature made sugar hard to get; man made it easy.”UK trade group the Food and Drink Federation (FDF) said "demonising" food was unhelpful when it came to health policy: “The causes of these diseases are multi-factorial and demonising food components does not help consumers to build a realistic approach to their diet,” said Barbara Gallani, director of food safety and science at the FDF.Providing perspective on the Nature commentary for FoodNavigator, Professor Jack Winkler, formerly of the Nutrition Policy Unit at London Metropolitan University, said whilst it is “significant ... that Nature chooses to give a prominent place to such an article,” he argued that the article itself is “the standard stuff by medics who are naive about policy.”Tighter regulationIncreased regulation and taxation on products containing sugars and other ingredients linked with declines in public health – such as salt and certain fats – have been proposed many times before, with some European countries and US states brining in so called ‘sin taxes’ in recent times.In the last year legislators across Europe have began to put additional taxes on foods thought to be unhealthy in an effort to combat rising obesity levels.Authorities in Denmark, Hungary, Finland, and France have already introduced a tax on such items, whilst Belgium, Ireland, Romania and Sweden are said to be actively considering a levy.However many food and beverage firms oppose the taxes, arguing that it is unfair and stigmatises products. The UK NHS choices service  said whilst it is generally accepted that added sugar or excessive sugar consumption is bad for health, “to what extent sugar is directly to blame for the rise in chronic disease and how much is due to other dietary components, such as saturated fat and salt, is open to debate.”Ineffective solution?Professor Winkler told this publication that Lugstig and his colleagues “are recommending a policy that they know will be ineffective” – noting that the commentary is narrow in diagnosis of the problem and proposes sugar regulations that it later admits will not work. “They are like so many before them, good – if narrow – on identifying a problem, but poor on ideas about how to solve it,” argued Winkler.“Worse even. They make sugar taxation their number one policy recommendation, before admitting at the end that it would not work,” he said.The retired professor of nutrition policy added that the second proposed policy – to restrict the sales of sugary foods and drinks in schools – will not work either.“Schoolchildren will simply buy what they want from shops on their way to school or on the way home,” he said, citing research that shows independent food purchasing by children begins at around age nine.Also speaking with FoodNavigator, Professor Andrew Renwick, University of Southampton, said the commentary in Nature “considerably overstates certain aspects” of the science “and is naive in others – especially in comparisons with alcohol.” However the former scientific advisor for the International Sweetener Association added that he was uncertain whether sugars would receive regulatory approval in the modern day environment.“If it were to be introduced as a new ingredient today I doubt whether it would receive regulatory approval,” he said.“For a start, it would be impossible to perform the high-dose safety tests (at more than 100-fold the human intake) that are the basis for the approval of low-calorie sweeteners,” he argued. 
The Association of European Coeliac Societies has adopted Coeliac UK’s gluten-free symbol as it looks to standardise gluten-free labelling across Europe. The Coeliac UK logo will be promoted as the industry standard for gluten-free products in Europe.Currently, multiple logos adorn gluten-free goods within the EU, which Coeliac UK says can be confusing for consumers.Crossed Grain symbolCoeliac UK CEO Sarah Sleet told BakeryAndSnacks.com that her organisation’s Crossed Grain symbol made it easier for coeliac consumers to choose safe products and gave manufacturers commercial advantages in a growing and competitive gluten-free market.“The coeliac community would like to see a single standard,” she said. “Virtually all consumers across Europe will recognise our symbol.” In the UK, around 90 companies have adopted Coeliac UK’s Crossed Grain symbol, including bread manufacturer Warburtons and supermarket chain Asda.The symbol also has a presence in continental Europe, particularly in Italy, Austria and Germany.Many supermarkets chose to adopt their own logo, but Sleet said that her organisation had been approached by supermarket chains.“Following the pan-European agreement we expect to see a rapid rise in the amount of manufacturers using the symbol,” said Sleet. She hoped to see the symbol become the European standard in the next two to three years. Pack placementCoeliac UK charges an annual licence fee to use its symbol, which varies depending upon the turnover of the gluten-free products listed in the licence.Sleet was asked whether it was a requirement of the license to place the symbol on the front of the packaging.While she said it was not a prerequisite, she said that her organisation would like to see it in a place of prominence.She added that the logo was a value-added symbol that could help manufacturers promote their products. Therefore it could be within a manufacturer’s interest to make the symbol highly visible on packaging, she said.Outside EuropeCoeliac UK has also recently trademarked its symbol in the US.A multitude of gluten-free logos exist in the US, but Sleet said Coeliac UK was in discussion with organisations such as the Gluten-Free Interest Group over potential synergies.However, she said that a universal system worldwide would be a challenge as the US threshold for what constitutes a gluten-free product was considerably lower than the EU and world standard.According to new European regulations on gluten-free products that were introduced on 1 January 2012, a product may bear the term ‘gluten-free’ if the gluten content does not exceed 20 mg/kg. (Commission Regulation (EC) No 41/2009) 
Leading fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) firms active in dairy have been particularly successful in increasing margins since 2006, despite rising commodity costs and a hostile economic environment, according to a new report from Rabobank.On a multi-year basis, such firms as Nestlé, Danone and Emmi had managed to increase margins significantly, Rabobank’s analysts said (in ‘Global Dairy Outlook: Show Me the Money!’), which more than offset a small decline in asset turns.As a result the financial services provider said that ‘FMCGs’ had boosted their return on capital employed (ROCE) by 200% since 2006, increasing the “performance gap” between themselves and the rest of the pack, with the exception of Southeast Asian companies.Authors Tim Hunt, Hayley Maynihan and Mak Kern picked out the latter (Alaska Milk, Dutch Lady, Ultrajaya, Vinamilk) as the “darlings of the global dairy industry”, which despite low value-add products and heavy reliance on imported dairy commodities, had almost doubled ROCE in the four years to 2010.Their success, Rabobank said, was due to skillful by margin increases by leveraging a high market share, successful roll-outs of lower cost product lines, and occasional trading-up to successful in higher margin products such as growing-up milk.Value-added productsRabobank said FMCGs had focused over many years on value-added products, which meant that raw material costs accounted for a lower share of sales than most other dairy businesses, and also limited the impact of the first commodity boom.“The fact that they had also been refining their product portfolios to focus on A brands left FMCGs less exposed to private label competition,” the authors wrote.Between 2006 and 2010, FMCG players continued to trade up further, Rabobank said, and since many of them were major multinational businesses had the ability to invest heaviliy in product innovation and then roll out such innovations over a broad market base.“They have also invested heavily in rapidly growing developing markets such as Southeast Asia and limited their exposure to maturing products and regions, building lead positions in the most profitable markets,”Finally, Rabobank said, FMCGs had successfully stripped costs from their businesses to defend Earnings Before Interest and Tax (EBIT) margins.Elsewhere, cheese makers (examples within the category include Saputo, Glanbia, Milk Link) were hit hard during the 2008 recession as they battled to pass on cost increases, while asset turns shrank as sales volumes fell and inventories jumped.But in general, between 2006 and 2010 rising EDIT margins had offset reduced asset turns, driving a 160% ROCE improvement.Rabobank attributed this to lower operating costs (with bigger firms investing in larger, more efficient plants), logistics and supply chain improvements and better use of whey byproducts following price surges in 2007.Liquid milk challengesAs the “most challenged” sector across a range of countries in the last four year, liquid milk processors (Dairy Crest, Dean Foods, Parmalat), were at the sharp end of problems facing the dairy industry as a whole, the authors said.These included rising retail power, private-label penetration, maturing markets and constraints on innovation.Since raw milk accounted for a high share of sales value, there was significant exposure to rising milk prices in the sector, while processors had to negotiate margins with “extremely powerful retail customers”, Rabobank said.“Since milk is a heavily commoditized product with ‘traffic building’ potential for retailers, private label penetration is high and rising in many countries, with retailers willing to periodically drop own brand prices to loss-making levels to attract customers.”Falling sales volumes in saturated markets such as the US and Japan made it difficult to achieve efficient asset utilisation, the authors added.Strict regulations on what was classified as milk in most countries also meant that processors had little wriggle room when it came to altering milk to improve functionality, nutritional profile and flavour, Rabobank said.Survival strategies included consolidation to reduce costs and increase market power, a ‘cost plus’ model in dealings with retailers and the buying-in of alternative or rival product lines, such as organics and soy, almond or rice milks.Developing markets dominateRabobank said it saw a future for dairy characterised by solid market growth dominated by developing markets – China, India and Southeast Asia are tipped to account for 80% of volume growth – with many dependent on outside assistance to supply sufficient product.This would sustain an era of trade growth and provide opportunities for farmers, traders and processors in export regions, Rabobank said.Tim Hunt, global dairy strategist, Rabobank, said: "Tapping into emerging market growth will present a particular challenge for many of the world's dairy processors, most of which are domiciled in, and still focused on, the EU and US markets"Economic, demographic and dietary trends meant that cheese sales, for instance, would grow more slowly in volume terms than the broader dairy market, Rabobank said, where it predicts 2.4% annual sales growth over the next five years.“With sales of higher-end whey products hitched to a faster moving wagon, the strategic value of ‘whey pools’ is rising rapidly, justifying a re-evaluation of ingredient production and sourcing strategies,” Rabobank said. 
High dietary salt intake could be linked with up to a 68% increased risk of gastric cancer, say researchers.A new study investigating a link between high salt intake and risk of gastric cancers could add to increasing pressure for industry-wide sodium reduction, researchers have said.The study – a meta-analysis of previous research published in Clinical Nutrition  – investigated the relationship between habitual dietary salt intake and the risk of gastric cancer using data from nearly 270000 people. Using data from seven previous studies, the researchers reported to find “a graded positive association between salt consumption and incidence of gastric cancer.” “Our pooled estimates indicate that habitual ‘high’ and ‘moderately high’ salt intake are associated with 68% and 41% greater risk of gastric cancer, respectively, compared with ‘low’ salt consumption,” said the research team, led by Professor Pasquale Strazzullo, from the University of Naples Federico II.Speaking with FoodNavigator, Professor Graham MacGregor of the Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, UK, and Chairman of Consensus Action on Salt and Health (CASH) said that whilst the findings of the study are not new, what it does do is confirm “in a very well done study” that previous findings are correct.Professor MacGregor explains the mechanisms and implications of the new meta-analysis.“My own view is that it’s getting to the stage where we can say that it is almost certainly causative,” said MacGregor, who added that the meta-analysis offered further evidence for the mechanisms behind salt’s effect on gastric cancer.Salt – some but not too muchSodium is of course a vital nutrient and is necessary for the body to function, but the average daily salt consumption in the western world, between 10 and 12 grams, vastly exceeds maximum recommendations from WHO/FAO of 5 grams per day to control blood pressure levels and reduce hypertension prevalence and related health risks in populations.In countries like the UK, Ireland, the USA, and other industrialized countries, over 80% of salt intake comes from processed food, and people therefore do not realize they are consuming it.Previous research has suggested that increased consumption of salted foods could increase the risk of certain cancers – including gastric cancer.“In general, the detection of statistical associations in prospective studies provides stronger support to the possibility of a cause–effect relationship; however, in the case of excess salt intake and risk of gastric cancer the cohort studies available did not show consistent results,” explained Strazzullo and his team.“For this reason, we carried out a systematic review and meta-analysis of these studies to evaluate the association between habitual levels of dietary salt intake and risk of gastric cancer and to obtain an estimate of risk.”Industry actionThe process of reducing salt levels in foods is an ongoing process within the industry, with many now acknowledging that high sodium levels in some foods is a major issue for the industry.Strazzullo and his colleagues explained that population reduction in salt intake –recognised as a global priority – through many avenues, including industry reformulation, has been suggested for the prevention of cardiovascular disease both in developed and developing countries.“Although our results do not conclusively prove a causal relationship between excess salt intake and risk of gastric cancer, they do suggest the potential for further benefit by this policy in addition to its effects on cardiovascular morbidity and mortality,” they said.MacGregor said that the latest findings “give another angle to salt reduction,” explaining that it adds into other evidence on cancer and cardiovascular disease to show that “reducing salt intakes globally needs to be a priority.”“I think if you talk to most people in the food industry, then they would say that so long as it’s a level playing field, and everybody has to do it together, then they don’t mind doing it,” he said.However, as simple as taking out some salt in foods might sound, the challenges associated with reducing levels in food are intricate and have major challenges in reformulation. Speaking to FoodNavigator previously, Dr Paul Berryman, CEO of Leatherhead Food Research, explained that reducing salt in foods is “a complex issue.”“Salt reduction sounds easy, but it isn't!” said Berryman, adding that the effects of salt reduction on food safety and shelf life are a particular worry because of salts action as a preservative.  Source: Clinical Nutrition Published online ahead of print, doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2012.01.003 “Habitual salt intake and risk of gastric cancer: A meta-analysis of prospective studies”Authors: L. D’Elia, G. Rossi, R. Ippolito, F.P. Cappuccio, P. Strazzullo 
Dutch confectionery firm BIP Candy & Toy has acquired British-based What Next Candy for an undisclosed sum.BIP said the deal would allow it to strengthen its position in the UK and Ireland with novelty confectionery products.What Next Candy is an import and distribution company based in Derbyshire, UK, that specialises in children's novelty and character licensed confectionery.“The combination of What Next’s distribution power and knowhow of the market with our licensed candy novelty product concepts will provide our clients a chance to grow their turnover on a new and innovative product category,” said Rogier Korsmit, president of BIP Candy & Toy.BIP said the acquisition would not affect the existing organisational infrastructure of What Next.The integration of both companies will take place over the next 3 months. 
DSM is set to transfer the manufacturing of satiety ingredients by its business unit from Sweden to the US claiming that it makes economic sense to relocate the facility due to the take-up of the products in North America.Production in Svängsta of the satiety products - Fabuless - will be continued until the end of May 2012. “As these products are already mainly sold in North America, DSM believes it is economically no longer feasible to keep the Svängsta site open,” said the ingredients producer.The company said has started the process of finding a new owner for the Svängsta site to preserve the existing 16 job positions. “Should DSM not succeed in finding a candidate before June 2012, the site will be closed down,” added the company.  
